 So good morning everybody and okay yesterday we were seeing the concept of anisotopy field and this is just a summary of the deviation of the expression for the anisotopy field which is essentially this this one two times k1 divided by mu0 ms and we have seen also an exercise concerning the calculation of the anisotopy field due to shape anisotopy in case of a thin field And the main outcome is that when you have a thin film, the field needed in order to saturate it out of plane is equal to the saturation magnetization. Okay, mu zero ms for iron is 2.2 Tesla. If you move to permaloy, it will be smaller, so it depends now on the material. But the key outcome is this. Okay, today we move on a little bit, looking at different origins of anisotropy. And in particular today, we start with the concept of magnetocrystalline anisotropy. What does it mean? It means that when you have a crystal with a specific lactate structure, it could be FCC, BTC, HCP, or another kind of structure, the atoms are arranged in such a way that in principle you could expect that the magnetization pointing along the side of the cube or along the diagonal could create different energy costs for the system and this is exactly what happens for the different structure that you see here so just understand the meaning of this plot in this plot you see the situation for example iron which is a bcc structure and what is plotted here is the M, the magnetization, recorded magnetization, normalized to the saturation magnetization, for different applied fields here, so it's B intent. And the different curves here are for different orientation of the field, applied field, with respect to the crystallographic axis. is true. When you have the field applied along the 1, 0, 0 direction, you have this steep increase of the magnetization with some bending here corresponding to the approach of the saturation of your system. But this is for H applied along the side of the cube, the 1, 0, 0 direction of the ion lattice. When you move now to the 1, 1, 0, which is along the diagonal on the face of the cube, You see they have the curve changes because the field needed in order to achieve the saturation is much bigger It's not the order of I don't know 5 10 to the minus 2 Tesla Okay, and if you move to the one one one direction you see but it's even It's even worse. Okay. What does it mean? So it means that here the anisotopy field in some sense or the field needed not to obtain the saturation is much larger for the one one one directional one one zero than in case of the one zero zero or in other words the one zero zero family of direction is that corresponding to the easy axis of your system. So along the 100, just a tiny field is able to cause the saturation of the magnetization. And if you move to the other direction, it's not like that. It's much more demanding in terms of the field needed to get a saturation. And this is the BCC structure. So now you jump just from iron to nickel, nickel is in FCC, and you discover the situation is completely different is different and you discover that now the art axis is the one zero zero okay and the easy axis is the one one one and the problem is that the structure is different so the interplay between the different of the um so we will see a lot of reason why why we have this but okay it's a spin orbit interaction at the end of the day and we will see why but okay the different structure causes a different arrangement of the easy and that axis in your system and when you move to the hcp to exactly close part structure which is that typical of cobalt for instance as we are within the 3d for magnets or iron cobalt nickel different structure for so much you have hcp exactly structure and the easy axis is that corresponding to the the out of plane direction so which means that uh corresponding to the axial of the integral and something which is really remarkable is the strength of the anisotropy in this case the k corresponding to um the anisotropic constant appearing also in uniaxial anisotropy especially when you try to model an isotopy along an easy axon as a sort of noctil reaction isotopy so the K is quite different than different K for iron is 0.48 10 to 5 joule per meter cube for nickel is much smaller 0.05 10 to 5 and for cobalt is in the order of 10 to 5 so 5 10 to 5 job for me thank you what does it mean it means that in terms of an isotopy strength the bigger is that the best found for core and this is really the material between you when we need typically a system which is a art system with a say I and it's not to be filled so and the reason is that you have seen yesterday the isotopy field is in the order of 2k divided by mu theta ms ms doesn't change too much okay it's not such a huge variation but here the strength by nickel and cobalt the strength and isotopy changes by two orders of magnitude and that's why if i want something which is a soft magnetic material something which is behaving like um which is not displaying at home is to be this i choose nickel if i want something which is displaying as strong as to be with very robust states i prefer cobalt okay or cobalt compounds and in terms of the uh shape of magneto crystalline and the result of the energy surfaces you see the difference for iron which is bcc if x y and z are this reference this axis here you see that along the uh zero zero one or this will this is zero zero one the other one should be one zero zero this one or this one zero one zero you have some minima okay which correspond to the easy axis and the art axes are along the diagonal for nickel you have a surface which is a complementary one the art axis correspond to the 100 family okay while the easy axis are on the diagonal like in this case where you see the minimum of this on this surface okay but now what about the origins which is the origin of the little pistol in point magnetic crystalline and isotopy there are two kinds of of magnetocrystalline anisotropies. The first one is the so-called single ion anisotropy, and the second one is the two ion anisotropy. Okay, this is the name which is conventionally used in literature and also in the textbook. So what do I mean, single ion anisotropy? Well, single ion anisotropy, this is essentially spin-orbit interaction, okay? The basic mechanism is spin-orbit interaction. How does it work? Essentially, the story is this one. You have a crystal, you have a lattice, and when you have a lattice, you have the crystal field. And the crystal field is the result of the arrangement of the different ions according to the lattice. And what is the impact of the crystal field? It's that you have some orbitals that could be degenerate when you have a single atom, that becomes no more degenerate when you have the atoms arranged in a crystal. And what is the impact? So this is the case, for instance, of the D states, okay? These are the atomic functions for D states in principle. But, okay, when you move now into a crystalline structure, for instance, that of a perovskite, I know that you have seen the perovskites with Giacomo probably for manganites, for other kinds of perovskites. So this is the typical situation of the pearl sky in which you see this Black atom is a manganese atom and here you see the cage of the octane by cage of oxygen Okay, and then you have so for the magnet you typically have One well known manganese lantanum strontium manganese or free with different, this is x1 minus x, okay? It's a pearl sky. So we have the manganese atom, which is that providing you with the magnetic moment. This is a magnetic material. You have the gauge of the oxygen atoms in octahedral configuration here. Then you have lantern and strontium, which are placed at the corners of the cube, okay, of the pearl sky structure. But if you concentrate now on the manganese atom, which is really surrounded by this cage of oxygen, now you have to think about the possible electrostatic configuration of your system. And you immediately realize that, okay, you have manganese, and now what is going on in terms of the D states, which are the outer states of manganese, the outer orbitals, where you have the outer charge. so you have the possible these states which are this one these and square that's where minus Y square okay this one okay this is not okay I'll say is X square minus Y square is that why I probably is X there than Y is that okay this kind of form so which is the big difference between all these orbitals the difference is that this one d z square and d x squared minus y squared they have some lobes directed along the axis along the x y and z axis okay and so it turns out that when you now consider the possible interaction with the p states localized in the ox in the oxygen atoms so clearly this kind of orbital they will see a much larger superposition with the charge concentrated in the p orbital and as a consequence they are at higher energy so because there is a problem of repulsion let's start the repulsion they are at higher energy with respect to the other states which are the z y x x y and y z because these hundred these states they have the loads which are not along the x y and z axis but along the diagonal between this axis so that the repulsion between these states and the p states in on the oxygen atoms will be minimized okay so for this reason when you are in the octahedron symmetry like that you find in the the first kind, the TG states corresponding to these orbitals here, XY, XYZ, all these guys here, they are at lower energy with respect to the EG state. And in fact, when you look at the spectroscopy of this system, you find that within the manganite, you have the EG bands, which is definitely below the Fermi level. And in one of the the T to G, so sorry, the T to G is the only thing, we have an EG in one of the spin channels is well above. It's an alpha-meter. We will see this in a while, at the end of the course. Anyway, but what is now the main result of this analysis for what is concerning magnetic anisotropy and magneto-crystalline anisotropy? When you have now a preferential occupation of all these states here, this means that these states have a different angular momentum, this different orbital angular momentum with respect to the other one. Well, what I mean is that due to this crystal field, you are selecting somehow the orbital angular momentum on your manganese atom. okay so you have an atom with some spins creating the magnetic moment but now there is the orbital angular momentum which is somehow blocked fixed by the crystal field but don't forget spin-orbit interaction this spin-orbit interaction is interaction between the spin of an electron and the relativistic transformation of the electric field produced by the ion. This is spin-orbit interaction in a nutshell. We will see, we will reduce spin-orbit interaction at the end of the course when we will see Rashba interaction. But OK, from a point of view of atomic physics, you know that spin-orbit interaction comes from the Zeeman-like interaction between the effective magnetic field, which comes from the relativistic transformation of the electric field produced by the nucleus, by the positive charge in the nucleus and the spin of the electric. Okay? And the Hamiltonian described in this interaction is a constant by the dot product of the operator for the orbital angular momentum and the spin angular momentum. So alpha L dot S. This is the spin-orbit interaction Hamiltonian that you have. So now, don't forget that the magnetization, especially in this class of material, is due to what? The magnetization of the net magnetic moment per unit volume comes from the spin of the electrons. So when you see here the spin, the spin of the electrons on average is giving you what? The magnetization. And so in this Hamiltonian is written the origin for the single ion magnetocrystalline anisotopy. If L is blocked, is fixed by the geometry of the crystal, the lattices are fixed in the L. And now if you have S, if you apply a magnetic field, you try to do what? To tilt the S. And as soon as you tilt the S, you start creating an energy cost, depending now on the sign of the alpha. That's essentially the explanation for the single-line anisotopy in the weak anisotopy limit. So in the case in which in a with spin orbit coupling with you know with coupling limit, which means that essentially you assume that L is fixed and you apply a field the field acts on M So it acts on S you create a field and this is the reason for the energy cost can make you have in your system. But there is also another possibility, which is a strong spinorbic coupling limit in which when you apply a field, you are also if the spinorbity is so strong, what you do is that essentially, L doesn't stay fixed and you bring L with you. But if you do this, you are deforming now the electrostatics, you are changing the electrostatics. So there is an energy cost, which is no more due to the spin-orbit interaction. So essentially the spin-orbit energy doesn't change, but there is an energy cost due to the deformation now of the orbital structure, or distribution of charge in the Atlantis. And this is also possible. If spin-orbit interaction is very, very strong and there is no more fix, you change L. But if you change L, this means that you are bringing with you water, I'm sure you're thinking with your chart distribution, and this has an extra energy cost. So in a nutshell, we see the physical explanation for the presence of magnetocrystalline anisotropy for the single-ion term. And as I was telling you, there's another possibility, which is that of two-ion anisotropy. to ion anisotropy is related to what? To the dipolar energy interaction between the different dipoles, dipole moment placed in a crystal box. Okay? So, first of all, I would like to remind you that we have already seen this at the moment where we calculated the magnetostatic energy. Okay? When I wrote the expression for the magnetostatic energy, I remind you that I want this expression. Minus the integral divided by 2, the integral of the volume of HM dot M in tau, plus something that was an integral that was, I'll say, proportional to M squared in the tau, plus something containing now another integral that was the integral of M by tensor lambda capital y.m and y. Okay? With some pre-factor that's not very interesting. Okay. This is the magnetic self-energy the expression that you are using in this lecture for magnetic energy. This one is negligible because it's similar to the exchange but it's 1000 new but what about that one this is exactly the origin for the two iron and isotropic if you remember i saw an exercise concerning the calculation of this for a simple cubic lattice and it will zero. So as it will zero, in principle, it is not, say, too high on the isotopy in a cubic lattice. But when you move to other lattices, like the FCC and so on, in other situations, you have to consider that if this one, if this tensor, is not identically equal to zero, and it will have some, I'll say, symmetry. The symmetry of this tensor determines the contribution to the anisotropy, which is due to dipolar energy interaction. You can understand now, in a very simple case, the origin of this kind of anisotropy just looking at this very simple example. So the simple example is this one. So if you consider now just two ions, okay, you have two sides, and now you have two magnetic moments. Let's suppose that they are parallel by exchange interaction. So the exchange is the reason why they are parallel, of course. But now they can be parallel, but placed in a different way with respect to the vector connecting the two. So essentially you have mu i, mu j, and this is r i j. But r i j can be either perpendicular to the two titles, or it can be also parallel. So you still have r i j, but you have the two guys placed like this, mu i and mu j. the two configurations that they have a different dipole energy now if you remember the expression for the field produced by one dipole at the other side so the field H I didn't know H I J it is now new 0 divided by 4 pi D that's not integral now, or is it? I don't need the integral, but there are two contributions. with minus mu j divided by Rij to the cube plus three times mu j dot Rij and then you have water gain, Rij. Okay? You have, this is the field. Now, if you close that now, decide that the field produced by one interacts with the other via a Zima-like expression, minus mu zero H dot mu, okay? You find that the difference between the two energies, this is an exercise left for your homework if you want, the difference between the parallel state, parallel means this one, and the head to tail state, which is the other one, is a positive value, which is coming from this term here. The first one doesn't change, but it's here that you see the dot product between the two. In one case it would be exactly equal to zero, in the other case it's not equal to zero. When you run that calculation, do that so that you can be more convinced you discovered that at the end of the day the parallel state has a higher energy. Can you understand physically what is the reason why? Why this is a high energy state with respect to the other one? Don't forget it's a super-thema interaction. One dipole field Sorry, fills the field produced by the other one. The distance is parallel to the spin momentum, so in the second configuration I don't have a torque moment that tends to give this thing to make them aligned. Yeah, I probably understand what you mean. So the idea is that look at the field produced by this guy on the other one. The field will be something like that. So the field will be antiparallel here, while in this case the field will be parallel. So in this case you have that the system stays in the lowest energy states concerning the interaction between the straight field produced by the first on the second and the other case is really the unstable state so principle it's a high energy state this one but okay apart from this very simple example this pressure for the client and surgery is here in this interview that we have seen in the expression for the magnetostatic handling and depending now on the symmetry depending on the symmetry of the lambda tensor you have different expression for the two iron magnet magneto crystal but it's still connected to the crystal structure that's why is considered here. Okay, now this is a peculiar shape of anisotopy, which is the cubic anisotopy, which is found quite often every time you have a cubic crystal, and at least in case of nickel, iron, you have this. It's a very at least to be mentioned, which is the expression that you can find in case of cubic symmetry. So when you have a cubic symmetry, what does it mean? You have a cubic symmetry, which means that s, y, and z are untouched. You can change them and nothing changes essentially. Today is not good, huh? Okay, so which means that the anisotropy energy per unit volume must respect the symmetry, which is the cubic symmetry, so that you can say that this anisotropy energy should be a function of some combination of mx, my, and mz which respect the fact that x, y are interchangeable. So that you can say, okay, fn could be a function of what, for instance, this expression within brackets, when you see combination of the square of mx and y and mz. So of course here you could change x with y or y with z and so on, nothing changes. So another possibility you just have the product of mx squared, my squared, mz squared. And the question is why do you need the square? Because if you could be similar to also plus x and minus x, they're exactly the same. So there's no difference. just a rotation by 180 degrees. So for perspective symmetry, you must have something which contains at least the square or the fourth power of the mx, my, and mz. And there is another possible combination that could be this one, mx to the third plus my to the third, mz to the fourth, but you immediately discover that this one is the linear combination of the other two. They are connected by this very simple expression here, okay? So essentially the idea is that to the lowest order you can write down expression for the anisotopy field, which is as we have seen for the uniaxial anisotopy, a constant which is k0 plus the k1 multiplied by this combination of mx squared, my squared and so on, plus a second constant k2, which multiplies this combination, which contains now m to the 6th. okay so it's an i order in this sense and usually you work also in spherical coordinates because when you run an experiment what you're changing are the angle between the field and the size of your sample where the size of your sample is typically aligned to some crystal direction let's imagine that you you buy for instance an mgo substrate which is zero zero zero zero one oriented so you know that the cut has been done along this direction if you make a cleavage of a silicon wafer you know exactly that so when you make this cleavage would be the one one zero direction okay so you know exactly how you can apply a field with respect to a crystallography axis and that's the reason why very often you work in in spherical coordinates in the sense but what you control is three mentally at the angles so if you now translate an expression like this one using the spherical coordinate what what the way mean is that i'm just saying that you have the x y and z and it's okay you have theta and oh sorry and five Okay, so you move now from x, y, and z to the theta and phi, so from the polar and azimuthal angular coordinates. And with this, you can find that this expression is just a problem, it's a matter of substitution, something which is quite simple. when you do these, this is in general, but never forget that for many applications, so we are dealing with thin films or portion of thin film where the shape anisotopy plays a big role. And what is the impact of the shape anisotopy? The main impact is that the magnetization by shape anisotopy is forced to be in the plane of the film. So instead of having a component along there, due to the shape and isotopy, you will tend to have the mz is zero, and the magnetization vector will be in the xy plane. But this means that theta is equal to pi over 2. And now if you put this expression, you put inside theta just pi over 2, you discover, okay, in this case, essentially you are left with a much simpler expression, which is essentially this one when you stay here. So it's k0 plus k1, the sine of square root of theta. and when you have the sine of square root of theta, this is no more uniar chart. It's a four-fold anisotopy. It's a four-fold anisotopy, which means that 1, 0, 0 is a minimum. 0, 1, 0 is a minimum. Minus 1, 0 is a minimum. 0, minus 1 is another minimum. It's a four-fold anisotopy, this one. The angular periodicity here is pi over 2. And this is the typical experiment that we carry out in the lab. You take now, right now there is a guy, now a group who is running the optimization of nickel-iron fields, okay? So nickel-iron films grow in different machines which just arrived for some application of an 8-inch wafer and so on. So okay, at some point, which is the routine, you take out your wafer, you check the stress, which is very fundamental, Otherwise, there will be some curvature in the wafer. You don't want to have that. You don't want to see a detachment of the field with some stress. And then the typical analysis, this one. You place inside the magnetometer, and you run now some measurement by rotating the sample, okay, around the z-axis. Okay, let's imagine that this is your film, okay, which is the z-axis here. and now you apply the field in this direction and you start rotating your sample like this so that you check now the possible and is out if there is not an isotopy you measure that any direction is equivalent to each other so these stories look they are exactly the same but if there is someone isotopy what do you expect to see so which is an exercise just to understand the difference Let's suppose that you have an iron film on MgO. 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0. What do I mean is that I have now... Imagine that you have now a wafer, which is, I don't know, a one-inch wafer. so the top view will be this one this is your sample and the iron film was grown epitaxially of a geode and you know that the 001 direction is the out of plane direction so this is the 001 your iron film is here ok Now, at the end of the day, you know that there will be a cubic structure. Of course, the distance is exaggerated. It's just to give you a sort of zoom about the crystal structure. Of course, this is just 2.87 ohms, so nothing as compared to the one-inch wafer that you have. But let's assume that you have this. And now you start measuring what? This rigid loop by applying a field here. So let's assume that this is your reference. And now you apply a field, which is H applied at an angle, which is an angle of theta, oh, sorry, in our frame is phi, angle phi with respect to the side of the cube of the iron crystal lattice, okay? And now you measure your hysteresis loop. And you measure your hysteresis loop and your hysteresis loop is always characterized by a shape with which in principle you can, let me do something which is not done. So this is H applied and this is M that you measure in the direction which is the direction that you choose. So is H applied at an angle phi, and this is the component of the M along the same direction of the applied field, okay? As in the usual experiment I presented you during last lecture. Now you will measure some hysteresis, and the typical parameters of hysteresis are this one. So you have a saturation, Ms, a remnants, Mr, and that. And the coercive field. Okay? Now, what is typically done in the lab is that you measure this three slope for all these and you plot the quantity as a function of the angle phi. Okay. And you typically what you typically do, you plot, you make a sort of polar plot. Okay. Now, what does it mean a polar plot? So now you take this one and this one. As a function, so this could be a reference axis, and so you know that this is a phi angle, that you take as a function of phi, you make a plot where the distance from the center is proportional to the point. And the good quantity could be, for instance, mR divided by mS. okay then R divided by Ls or you plot the coercive field and when you plot this quantities if there is an anisotopy you will see exactly the polar plot which is corresponding to the kind of anisotopy that you have in your system okay now Now the question could be this one, which kind of plot do you expect to find here? In this case, if the system is fully symmetric, you should find what? A circle. But your system is not fully symmetric. It's an iron crystal lattice with cubic and isochropic. Here, the high algebra must be the same. Yeah. And also the other... What is called four-fold and exorbitant. You expect to see a four-figured, which you expect now the four-fold and exorbitant. by rotation of pi over 2, you should find the example in the same situation. And if you have now... what's your name? Sorry. No, wait. No, no, no. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. If you have now two gates, what could be the fourfold plot that you expect to see here? that now pi equal to zero is an easy axis. If you have an easy axis, what value do we expect for mR divided by mS? One. Okay, this is one. And then this one will be, this will be heart axis. So they are corresponding to the zero. So this is the one zero zero direction. This is the one one zero direction. So these are easier axes. No, they are harder axes. So if it is a not axis, typically the resonance will be lower. the problem is that as soon as you remove the field, the system doesn't like to stay in that particular way. It's a non-vector system. And this means that here you will have something to hold. So, ideally, you will find something like this. If you plot them by dividing by ms, you will find a figure, a plot figure, a polar figure that shows you directly the kind of symmetry that you have. Now, this is the kind of... So if you have an hexagonal symmetry, you would find an hexagon and so on. That's a very powerful methodology for checking the anisotopy that you have. There are other kinds of techniques. For instance, ferromagnetic resonance is very powerful for measuring the strength of the anisotopy. And also in that case, you have some polar figure, but okay. So today you don't know what is terminated resonance. Okay, let's move on. Oh, okay. Good. Now I have to go back to this one, equal, and that should be okay. Okay, let's move on. So far, we have been talking about single domain configuration. So even yesterday, when I had solved the problem of the minimization of the Landau free energy, my first assumption was, let's assume that we have a small body, so that inside the body, by exchange interaction, all the spins are parallel, which is a single domain. But in practice, we do not observe always single domain. And especially, we will see that at some point, when the size of the body is large enough, The body, magnetic body, tends to split into different domains, where a domain is a region surrounded by some domain walls, inside which the magnetization is parallel. And when you jump from one domain to another domain, you change the orientation. Inside each domain, all the spins are parallel. When you move from one domain to another one, there is now a jump in the orientation of the magnetization. Now what is the physical reason for this? Why this happened? And the reason, sorry, is essentially the minimization of demagnetizing energy and magnetostatic energy, dipolar energy. And you can easily understand that story if you just remember the second expression for the magnetostatic energy, which is the second one, with a plus. Plus mu zero divided by to the integral of the whole space of the d minus n squared integrated over the wall or the whole space okay and look at this very very simple sketch this is just a cartoon let's assume that you have for instance a a piece of silicone covered with some nickel with some cobalt whatever you want and let's imagine that you have a single domain if you have a single domain it will behave like a single dipole. And the straight field of a dipole is a fountain of field which invades the world space. So this is connected to a sizable integral that you calculate here. But now, if you imagine that you create now a domain wall, which is this vertical line here, separating the two regions, one on the left with the magnetization point upward, and the other on the right with the magnetization point downward, what happens the stray field as in case of the field generated by the magnetic charges will tend to close now without invade in the world space okay because now you have positive charges here negative charges here and the magnetic field light will tend to close from positive to negative charges without the need of invading the world space and if you add this clearly this integral would be much lower okay so the problem is really the minimization of magnetostatic energy at some point the energy cost for say this big straight field due to a single domain is so high as the system prefers to split into domains and create this closed flux configuration okay but the question and I should be, but why this happens when you have large bodies? It should. So the same motivation, the same argument should hold true also for very small particles, or not? Yeah, yeah. What a problem now. The problem is that here, what I'm not considering is the energy cost for the creation of the domain wall. Because when you create a domain rule, what happens? You say, okay, I have my extended field. Now, on the left, I have the magnetization, the spin pointing like this. Yeah, but if I create a domain rule, the spin cannot jump from being vertically placed, pointing upwards on one hat of the iron lattice to being oriented downwards on the other hat on place at 2.87 Ostrom because this would imply a cost in terms of exchange interaction which is not affordable by the system okay and so what happens physically is that every time you have this there is a region an intermediate region in which you assist to the rotation of the spin, which is a gradual rotation. So this means that inside here you have your lattice now, and here you will see that, okay, you will see a gradual rotation of the magnetization of on the spin, that is affordable in terms of what? In terms of the exchange energy, because you minimize the tilt angle between neighbor spin. And of course, the problem here is, okay, you do this to minimize the exchange interaction cost, but you still have some exchange interaction cost. of energy cost due to exchange intervals. And on top of that, especially if you have a sort of anisotropy, like in case for instance of cubic anisotropy, this is the easy axis. Let's imagine that you have, I don't know, cubic anisotropy or even union axiom anisotropy, which is easier to treat mathematically as we will do after the break. So you understand that here on the left And on the right, the uniaxial anisotropy is zero, because you are parallel to the easy axis. Parallel or antiparallel is the same for uniaxial anisotropy. But within the domain wall, there is now a tilt angle that creates an additional cost in terms of magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy. So, the answer to the original question is, even though it's always better in terms of magnetic energy to split, to break your magnetic body into domains, so this is something which is to be, I'll say, compared to the energy cost which is associated with the creation of the domain wall here. And only at some size the gain in magnetostatic energy justifies the extra energy cost due to the creation of the domain wall. That's the reason why in very very small sample you don't see the domain wall and in very large sample you will see some domain wall. And now we take a break and then we will see some calculation, some estimation of the energy associated with the creation of the domain. Okay now the question is, which is the critical size at which we start seeing the transition between the single domain and the multi-domain of the domain. So if I convince you that due to the gain in the polar energy interaction at some point, the system can break into domains, but this creates an additional energy cost at which critical size this transition can be seen. And there is a very, very simple argument explaining what is going on. And it's not here. It's not here. I'm a little bit confused in this. It's not here. It will be in another lecture. But OK. So, yeah. So it depends now on the year. Sometimes I do like this, sometimes I do like that. So for today, let's do like this. When you create this domain wall, there will be an energy associated to this domain wall. So this means that now we have to understand how you can calculate this energy cost. And what is the typical weight of the domain wall that we expect to see before we can calculate now the critical size at which the transition between the single domain and the multi-domain can happen. So we are interested essentially in these two parameters, delta wall which is now the thickness of the wall. So let's imagine that this is a top view of your system but in reality it is like this, right? You have a film like this, and there will be a region that will be this one in 3D, okay? So you have a film whose thickness is this one, so which is a thickness which is T, okay? The domain will occupy a region that will be a volume, in this case it's a prism, with, say, this size, which is the delta wall, the domain wall width, and there will be a thickness, okay? Now, there'll be an energy associated to this volume, but very often in literature, you find the concept of the surface energy associated to a domain wall. And one could say, why is it surface? This is a volume. Okay, now the problem is to see how big is the domain wall width with respect to the typical size, the microscopic size of your sample. So the problem is K, which is this, but then you add the size of your sample, which is L. It could be 10 millimeters, this K size. And now the question is how big is delta W with respect to L? In many circumstances, you find that this domain wall width could be in the order of 50 nanometers, 200 nanometers, but this 200 nanometers compared to 10 millimeters is nothing. So at some point, you can say that if delta W is much lower than half, in the end of the day, What you have is a sort of line or a sort of surface or what you make is that you make this the way wall collapsing into a surface into a plane which is this plane here. So it will be a plane. It's just that's imagine it today the intermediate plane and so you have an energy per unit surface okay where the unit probably this is not a very nice nice plot. so if i could cancel it instead of this i could draw something and now the i'm saying okay now essentially all this volume collapses into this surface and so you introduce now the surface energy density. So that you say the energy of the wall will be equal to sigma w multiplied by, in this case it will be what? It will be, let me use h, by h and by the thickness. OK, you don't see any longer the domain wall width, so you make it collapsing into a unique surface and the energy associated with the wall would be equal to the physical surface associated with this portion here, this dash region here multiplied by the energy density of the wall. And now what we have to do, our task is calculate W, delta W, and sigma W. Okay? In a very simple case. This calculation was done first time by Block. And as a matter of fact, when you try to classify the domain rule, there is a, I'll say, a first classification into Block rule and Nihil rules. Don't say Nihil. I want to make a sort of English pronunciation, but okay, Nael was a French physicist, so the pronunciation is Nael, okay? It's not Niel, it's Nael. Nael wall and block wall. So in the block wall, and this is a picture taken from your textbook, so you have there from Blandell. So here you see, the idea is that this is, okay, you have on the left the spin pointing down, on the right you have the spin pointing up like this, and this is now a sort of piece of the domain wall, taking this direction, like this, okay, in which Blundell represented the rotation of the spin. You see the spin start like this and then it gradually rotates till it reaches now the anti-parallel configuration, okay, but the interesting story is that here the spin is rotating always parallel to the surface of the domain wall where the surface is this one Okay So the surface of the domain wall is that corresponding to the surface or is parallel to each of these disks represented here in gray. So you start from up and you rotate like this. So let's imagine that this is the surface of your field, on the left is like this, and then it's rather rotate like this, but always being parallel to the plane of the domain wall. On the other hand you can have the Nehal domain wall in which you start from this, but the rotation is in the plane which is perpendicular to the domain wall surface. Okay? Black wall and Nail wall. They can be observed in different conditions in films, especially in very thin film of film alloys, you essentially see just Nail wall, but you also see black wall where you increase the thickness in some configuration. This is also visible. Okay, the first calculation of the energy course for the wall was done by Bloch, in case of the Bloch wall, of course. And now we will try to go through this calculation, which is very simple. There are some refinements of the calculation that, okay, consider in more detail some aspects that the order of magnitude of things and the expression and the dependence on the different parameters is here. Is here. Okay, this is really the first calculation done with the meaningful result Okay, first of all, you have to estimate which kind of energy flow to contribution. First one is When you create a domain wall you have exchange and Super distribution, okay One could say, ah, but there is also some dipolar energy contribution. Okay, but now the idea is this one. You calculate the energy difference between two states. So you start from the initial state, which is this one. All the spins are parallel, okay? And now you create a state, which is the final state, in which you have this, and the domain world, which is placed here. And now essentially you say, when you do this, you are gaining world. gaining in terms of when the static energy you can see what almost assume that here the magnetic energy tends to be your so the real extra energy cost is that associated to the exchange and that is also because that you have here so now we have to calculate exchange and one is or two independent due to the tilt of the spin it happens inside the domain okay let's start from exchange interaction so now you have a chain of spin so let's imagine that you have now a lattice it could be a cubic lattice and this is the wall and now you see this is delta O and you have okay a chain of lattice points so the lattice perimeter is A this is lattice perimeter and now you have that here the spin is pointing up and here the spin is pointing down. Okay? The first assumption is a good assumption by by Blackwood. Okay, how this rotation is distributed over the chain and the idea was that it is distributed equally. Okay? This is the first approximation. Don't forget that Enrico Fermi estimated the power, the energy of the first nuclear bomb just taking out of his pocket some pieces of paper and observing the angle at which they for they fell down due to the the wind coming from this explosion okay this was the way he made the estimation but the order magnitude was correct so what you say okay let's assume that you have the delta wall and the delta wall is equal to what delta wall is equal to n times a so you assume that you have and lattice constant inside. Okay? Good. So this means that from one spin to the neighbor one, there will be a rotation angle, and this will be a rotation angle theta, and theta, you will assume is equal to pi divided by n. But now we have to calculate the exchange energy, and this is done following what we have already seen. Now the energy associated to each couple at variance with what I did last week probably now and not doing a summation over I and J and Jai now and just something the exchange and just a city to each couple Moving from the left to the right So the expression for a single couple is this one with this factor 2 which corrects the fact that usually J is is E triplet minus E singlet modules divided by two. Okay, this correct, this two here, is minus two times J S I S one dot S two. And okay, this means minus two J S squared cosine of theta, where theta is the angle between the two, okay? And now, as we know, theta must be small because otherwise the cost energy will be too high. and if it is more expanded because I know it in one minus theta squared divided by two. And this means that apart from the constant arising from the one which is here, you have now minus two by one half, which cancel out, and you're left with this expression. So the energy, yes, the energy cost associated to exchange interaction would be what? And you have now N couples that in terms of exchange energy are all identical because the angle between negative spin, it will be always theta because by assumption is distributed that rotation equally over the N sides. So this means that you have N identical terms and each terms is given by J S squared, theta squared, which is pi divided by N. And that's it. So this is the energy of the exchange energy associated to this chain of dipoles, each dipole on each lattice point. Okay? Good. But this is just, this is an energy in Jou. If you want to go to the idea of the surface energy associated with the wall, sigma w, what do you do? You just divide by the area associated to this chain, and the area of core, it will be this one, which is a squared, for a cubic lattice. Okay? This chain of hatel, it projects into this surface, and the area assigned to each hatel in a cubic lattice is a squared, where a is the lattice constant of your cubic lattice. Are you okay? Good. So that's the expression, the final expression. So interestingly enough, so let me comment on this. Sigma wall due to exchange interaction is given by what? J s squared pi squared divided by n a squared. You see that the dependency of m on n is like 1 over n. What does it mean? It means that when you increase n, you increase the domain load where the exchange energy decreases. Do you see the physical reason for this? the distance will be... There is another problem with distance. Each spin has always the distance with the negative one. The angle of impact is more, so the decrease in the vibration reduction is high enough for bending. Yeah, and there is also another story which is... Which will be visible in a while as soon as the system reconfigure itself in a good way. But it will happen in a while, probably. No. It is boring. Oh, no, it's okay. The story is like this. The exchange energy is proportional to theta squared, which means one over n squared, while the number of sides goes like n. So overall, it goes like one over n. Because one could say, okay, you are increasing the number of sides, but this means that you have a smaller angle but a larger number of couple. But the problem is that the exchange energy goes like theta squared. And that's the reason why overall, so if you increase the width, you gain in terms of energy. So, Basset, please. What if we don't only consider the first-year standards? We consider the second one that it becomes the order of 10 squares. Yeah, OK. That's a correction. As I told you, it's a tiny correction because the second order of 10, the second in the Russian economy would be that in the end, it would not change the name of some figures in the US. Of course, it would be a correction, but not as well. So not that the mining is changing the overall trend that we have seen a while. And the overall plan is that the exchange interaction tends to promote wide domain work. So this means that we have a body with a large exchange thickness. The area of the unit in front of the unit is about the gradient of mx, and so on. Because we have a large thickness, so this material tends to display a very wide domain work. That's the exchange, but exchange is not the unique energy course. We have also the course of anisotropy. And the typical situation is that you have anisotropy, which is that fixing the magnetization direction in the two domains, on the left and on the right, which means that with reference to this case or this one, we can say that the z-axis is like this and like that. So it's the same z-axis on the whole material. So it's a uniform configuration. And this is really the assumption in the block in which I think of the calculation of this. So the assumption was, OK, let's assume that we have the z-axis. So, but did you, sorry, this is a break. Did you ever imagine, so what these guys did at that time? They discovered the quantum mechanics. They started applying it to the different systems, and they had the opportunity to really write the physics. So let's imagine what was in doubt. Let's see what could happen in this case. A piece of paper, just a few calculations, it should be like that. And now we have all the use of this. That's really exciting. Every time you have a new phenomenon, you write the theory of peace. That's definitely interesting. But it's just a break. Anyway, so Bloch was doing this, and the basic assumption was the simplest one, which is another very powerful story. In your life, your scientific life, every time you can, please simplify the model, just to capture the physics, not to insert everything. So many students later, OK, I have to put this, that, and so on. And then you don't understand anything. many variables, you cannot disentangle things and you don't understand anything. So try to simplify the model as much as possible. This was really the beauty of the third model by Bloom. Then there are some refinements. The typical refinement is that it's not true that the rotation is equally distributed over the n side. It's not true because this is not a real minimization of the energy. But this is a second way to refine. It doesn't matter. Let's capture now, let's see the real physics of the problem. Okay, second energy cost, anisotopy. We move to anisotopy, it's linear anisotopy, k1 sine square of all the angles theta. And now, pay attention that during the rotation, now the energy, the cost in anisotopy, because this would be 2 theta, will increase now over the chain until a given point, then it will decrease again. So you cannot just multiply n by something in this case. You have to calculate the real summation of the difference and the result of the energy cost for each point in the lattice. And this is done here. So you make a summation for i from 1 to n of k sine squared theta i. Okay, now you can move to an integral. Of course, when you move to an integral in d theta, you have to divide by the step, which is you divide by pi over n, which means you multiply by n over pi. And when you carry out this integral, you discover, okay, but this is what? This is the average value of the sine square of theta, which is one half. So it's n by k by one half and k divided by two. Very simple estimating. And now there's something to be understood. What's now the dimension of the units in the international system of units of this quantity here? It's a number multiplied by k divided by 2. What is now the unit, which are the units for k? Joule per meter cubed. Don't forget this. is the energy density that's appearing here. So it's Jal per meter cube, but this is not a surface energy density like this one. This is Jal per meter squared. So what's the problem right now? Okay, the problem is that you're, essentially when you do this, you're making a summation of energy density, okay, integrating over the chain. So now you should say, now I have to multiply what? I have to multiply by the volume of each unit cell and divide by a squared. In the end, you just multiply by a. So this means that in terms of the sigma more due to anisotropy, you should say, okay, let me take NK divided by two. I multiply by a to the cube in order to find the total energy as it was this expression here. The total energy of this chain is the total energy of the chain. And then you divide by a squared. In the end, you find nKi divided by two. And now you need to realize that the dependency on n is completely different. Now this energy is proportional to n, which means that an isotopy travels very, very narrowly. Not wide, but narrowly. Because the ideal case should be a jump from up to down just over a single lattice contour, which is unaffordable to exchange in the Marshall bar, the best situation for an isotopy. So now you have two terms that must be added in order to find the total energy cost. But these two terms, of course, they are different dependency on n. And it's really the competition between these two which determines the equilibrium configuration, which is the n which is able to minimize the total energy cost for the creation of the world. And this is essentially written here. The total energy cost of the block wall is the sum of the exchange interaction energy, which is inversely proportional to n, and the anisotropy energy, which is directly proportional to n. And to find the equilibrium configuration, you just find what the minimum for this quantity by the derivative, you find that the n, the n value which minimizes this quantity is given by pi s to j divided by k. And the rest, which is here. So that the delta of the wall will be equal to pi s to j divided by k, k, multiplied by what? This is n. I have to multiply to find the domain wall with my head. Good. And now let's arrange a little bit all these terms. So pi can stay in front of everything. that s goes inside the square root, which becomes 2j s squared. And now you have this a, that if it goes inside becomes a squared, and so you simplify with a to the cube, you find what? k divided by a. Sorry, one over k and then this is divided by a. But now, probably you don't remember very well, but this one, within brackets, corresponds to what? To J square divided by by a is the exchange stiffness, that we have calculated for a cubic lattice. And we are really dealing with a cubic lattice. And for this reason, you find that this is equal to pi A divided by K, which is really a meaningful expression. So the prefactor pi depends on the approximation of block D, the Berson refinement, that in the end replaces this pi with other constants, but the dependency is still the same. So the domain wall width is proportional to the square root of the exchange stiffness divided by the anisotropy energy. Anisotropy constant, sorry. Anisotropy energy density. Does it make sense? Yes. Large A, relevant exchange interaction, very wide domain wall. Large anisotropy, large K, very narrow domain wall. If you want to see a narrow domain wall, do you use nickel or cobalt? Cobalt. Shares 5 by 10 to 5 joules per meter cube. And for the exchange, for the exchange the dependency is not so huge because the A is always on the order of tens of picojoules. So we go from 10 to 20. So the use dependency is not of k, it's essentially of k for the 3D permanganate, determining now what is happening in terms of the main one. And of course, once you have the n, you can put the n inside the sum of these two. Essentially you put the n inside this expression, you leave your hand that you are found by and you find the corresponding surface energy density. And sigma of the mole is now in the block treatment is proportional to the product of A by K. Okay? And this makes sense. The largest constant appearing in the evaluation of the anisotopy and the exchange energy is the largest energy cost. And now if you numbers. This is just a table which summarizes the situation for block domain wall in case of typical material that we will see in this course and that we use every day in magnetism. Iron was about ms in units of the international system or in mega amps per meter squared. 1.7 megaamps per meter. Cobalt 1.44 okay. Concerning A you see it's not big difference 21, 31 but the K1 is very different it's one order of magnitude and the typical domain wall width is for iron 64 nanometers for cobalt 24. And then there is this guy here nickel 80 iron 20. Not the other we were one of my group made a mistake last year and the commission is the machine and for some reason we ordered nickel nickel 20 iron 80 which is completely different okay it is an alloy it's called permaloy this one and is widely used for instance is the typical material used in the compass sensor in your mobile phone it's useful this because okay it has a quite high amr an isotopic magneto resistance but also a very low magnet restriction which is a phenomenon that i didn't discuss with you so far but probably i will discuss it later on in the course which means when you take a magnetic material and you apply now some strain to this magnetic material you see that you develop some anisotropy. When you compress the lattice, you can see probably the reason why you can start seeing a different anisotropy, which is called magnetostriction. So when you have decomposition which is nickel 80, iron 20, you are minimizing magnetostriction. So that material is much more stable, it doesn't respond mechanically to the application of the magnetic field and it doesn't respond or say with a change in the anisotopy due to the fact that you're applying a stress and so on. So anyway, so it's more inert from the point of view of magnetostatic. But this material is very relevant because it's very soft material. Soft means that that it doesn't have a very large cohesive field because the anisotopy constant is 0.15 kilojoules per meter cube. It's so small that in simulation, even in the simulation that we will carry out together, or possibly the simulation that you will be invited to do during your project, you will put this constant equal to 0. It's not 0, but it's so small that with respect to other kinds of anisotopy, the magnetocrystalline is negligible, can be safely neglected. So it's a very soft material. And which is the impact? You immediately see here as k is added as the denominator. So immediately, you see that this very small value reflects in a very large size width of the domain wall. The domain wall becomes larger. So 800 nanometers on the order of one micron. And so on. And OK, this is just a calculation giving you essentially the same number which is appearing here just to show you that number makes sense. Looking inside the real number. But what is now the main message of this table? OK, you see now that depending on the material, there is a domain world with. And now we start answering the question. So at which critical size you start to see the appearance of domains? At the size which is larger than the domain wall. Because the domain wall width is this one. If now you have a body which is smaller than the domain wall, it cannot be a domain wall. So essentially, if you have now a piece of formaldehyde, wall size is much smaller than 800 nanometers. No way to see a domain wall. What you will see is just a single domain. So for observing a domain wall, you must have now a size of your dot, of your stride, which is bigger than 800 nanometers. For cobalt, of course, the situation is different. For cobalt, you go down to the nanometer size. okay and in fact you can have nanoparticles of cobalt typically train 15 nanometer which are safely in a single domain configuration and they are used typically in superparamagnetic particles used for biology application other kind of things or superparamagnetic application but we don't know know what the superparamagnetic we have to wait for the next lecture from this okay and uh we have an exercise so i will give you an exercise and we will solve it next time okay let's let's start thinking next time think about it if you want I'm not writing anything. I will send you this exercise, okay? I will put it on the webpage. But I'd just like to comment now the exercise in itself. So let's consider a film of cobalt in this configuration. This is a top view. It's a top view. And you see that there are some domains here with magnetization up-down, up-down, but there are also some closure domain corresponding to these triangles here with the magnetization like this which creates really a closure of the domains which is meant to do what? To minimize magnetostatic energy. This is exactly what you see. I will show you next time some real image is taken with our microscope showing that when you make a sort of imaging of the body you see that at some point you see the appearance of the magnetic domain at something you find exactly this shape like this and now you say okay the main domains they have this border parallel to the easy axis which is vertical as you see that the big domain they have the magnetization in line with the easy because you have to minimize the anisotopy energy. Okay, there are some problems here in this closure, flux closure domain that you have here. And then you say that the energy per unit surface which is associated to the domain walls at 180 degrees. So the surface energy associated to this wall here is 410 to the minus three joule per meter square. is the delta W that we calculated there. While the contribution to the total energy associated to the domain wall at 90 degrees, which means here, this is a 90 degree domain wall, this can be neglected under the assumption that L is much larger than D. And reason is quite evident, this L is much larger than D. The contribution to the total energy by this domain wall largely exceeds the contribution arising from this closure domain that you have here. Okay, in this condition demonstrate that the width of the domain can be expressed like this. So it's just a problem of minimization of the non-doubtful energy of your system, your remnant, taking into account that you have also the energy cost due to the domain wall. And then under the assumption that L is 5 make a calculation of the real weight of this domain. Okay? This is an exercise left for you for your leisure. If you don't have anything else instead of watching a Netflix series you can solve this one. So see you not tomorrow but on Thursday. Bye! Thank you.