 Okay, this was the exercise I proposed last time. And now let's start with the solution of this exercise. Did you try to solve this exercise? Yeah, you tried. By mind. Okay, Fermi was able to solve everything in his mind. So did you try to find the result? You had something better to do probably, yeah. Okay, so just a very quick solution. It's very, very simple. It's just to see how it works. I'll see how you can deploy the knowledge about the GL and so on in this case. So it's a thin film of cobalt in this configuration here. So let me try to sketch this configuration in a sort of 3D representation, which is not easy, but I will do my best. okay so let's assume that we have something like this something like this not fantastic but ok makes sense at least it should be understandable ok this is your field a sort of 3D representation that was the top view now the typical size are L and D so L is this length here okay and D is the width of each domain this is D okay and the configuration of the magnetization is that depicted over there so that you have a close close flux configuration so you tend now to close this way and so this will be like this and so you will have something like that and like this and like that and here is the other way around okay like this and like that okay the errors represent now the magnetization in each domain so these straight lines here are representative of the domain walls that you see this is not restrains configuration something that you can see really in some in some structure okay now let's assume that you have now a thickness and the thickness could be I I don't know, TH, it's up to you. Let's say that this is the height or thickness of the film, H. And then something that was not there, but that could be useful for the calculation, is to see that, let's assume that you have a finite piece of your film, which is a piece of film cut from an 8-inch wafer. so that you have now that this size could be a so the top view now you have a rectangular shape of your film a by hell is the surface okay now okay now you know the K is the K of cobalt 5 10 to 5 joule per meter cube and domains are like this okay and you have now the Sigma wall Sigma wall which is that associated to the 180 degrees so this walls here I have to simplify now, I cannot. So this one, this one, and this one, these are 180 degrees domain walls, okay? And this is 410 to minus three. Joule per meter squared. It's also stated in the text that now the domain wall energy associated to this 90 degree domain wall can be neglected. Not because I'll say it's not present, so there should be a cost, but you can say that you can neglect now the energy cost associated to this domain wall in the limit that L is much larger than D because this energy cost associated to this wall under 80 degree will be much more relevant than the other one. Okay demonstrate that in this condition the width of the domain the D can be can be expressed with this formula here. So how can you do that? So the mechanism is always the same. So what you can now use is the thermodynamics of these bond magnetic bodies. So you have to write a suitable expression for the GL, for the Landau free energy, and then try to minimize it. Well, the free parameter in this case would be D. How can you write the expression for the GL? So first of all, you are in remnants, which means that essentially the GL, you know, GL should be what? The U minus TS minus mu0, sorry, minus the integral, okay, mu0 H dot M in the tau over the volume. OK, but H is 0, so this can be neglected. The other one is neglected because this coaster will work always at low temperatures, so that the entropic contribution is neglected. So you're left with the internal energy. Now, which are the contributions to this internal energy? Exchange interaction, dipolar energy, magnetocrystalline and isotope, the three contributions that you have to take into account. And now, this is in general, but now you have a situation in which you have that. Let's start with the exchange energy. The exchange energy will be zero inside each domain. So exchange energy is zero because inside each domain, M is uniform. So the gradient of MX and YMZ, they are zero. So there is no tilt between the spin, no energy cost due to exchange energy. So the unique localization of exchange energy will be in the domain wall. And concerning now the anisotropy, the anisotropy energy will appear here due to two different facts. Something that I didn't explicitly mention but is clearly visible here is the easy axis for the uniaxial anisotropy. So let's suppose that when you solve this exercise, it's in absence of any other statement, any other indication. You have to do a sort of unilateral result, which is good also for Cobalt. Cobalt has an easy axis along the z-axis, the c-axis of the HCP structure, which makes sense. So you have this easy axis here. So what is clear is that if you take now, Now, if we consider these domains where the magnetization is parallel to the easy axis, inside these domains, there is no energy cost associated to the uniaxial anisotope. You are along the easy axis. Let's take this as a reference for the energy. But in this triangular domain, there is an energy cost because here the magnetization is at 90 degrees. So we would like to take into account the anisotope energy coming from this one. this rectangular domain. And on top of that, you have an additional contribution to the anisotropy energy. Where is it? Where does it come from? The walls, okay, the walls. Okay, and what about dipolar energy overall? Considering dipolar energy, you can say, Okay, but this is a closed flux configuration. So to the first order, you can assume that the dipolar energy is essentially zero. And the reason is that, as you see there, the magnetization line, there are some closed lines. The street field will be the minimum. That's the reason why you see that configuration. So the domain appears because the system wants to minimize the dipolar energy. So as a first approximation, you can assume that the demagnetizing energy is approximately zero. This is a very good approximation here, because this is the result of the minimization of the dipolar energy, which is almost zero. It will be exactly zero in the approximation, but there is no straight field. But OK, as a safe approximation, you can say, OK, the demagnetizing energy, the dipolar energy, is essentially zero. OK, good. This was H applied, of course. Okay. Now, let's build up the expression for the GR. Okay, let's start now from... So, essentially, we are left with two contributions. The energy associated to the domain walls and the energy associated to the magnetocrystalline anisotropy, or, say, yeah, this magnetocrystalline anisotropy. localized in this triangular domain. Okay, let's start with the domain wall energy. So if I have to write the energy associated to the domain wall under the innate degrees because the other assumption was that the contribution from the 90 degree is negligible. So how can you write it? first of all so you have different different domain walls and if I want now to sketch how so this I these are the walls okay these are the walls I'm talking about okay so they will have a length on the the order of L, it should be in L minus D by something. And then frankly, oh my God, that's boring story. I don't, I didn't fix. It loses the connection from time to time. So is there any question? Yes, there is a question. Did you fix it? Okay, good. Okay, one should say, okay, I have this say this domain wall, so the energy for a single domain wall will be sigma w 180, this one multiplied by the surface of this one and the surface will be what? It will be essentially So, okay, now it should be understood because now this is D. This is again D, okay? So this means that in principle, this size here should be equal to, okay, this is D half. But you have d half here, so it should be l minus d. Okay? Do you see that? Am I correct or not? This. Okay? It's l minus this minus that. They are equal. And they are equal to d half. So it's l minus d. Does it make sense? No, it doesn't make sense. Are you okay or not? Okay, good, so just tell me yes or no. Multiply by the h. And this is just a contribution for a single domain wall. How many domain wall do you have? In principle, you have a number which is proportional to the ratio between A and D, okay? Now, in the assumption that L is much larger than D, it's also possible that you can neglect this. And I don't remember, frankly speaking, if this is an assumption leading to this expression or not, let's see, okay? So if you want to be very accurate, it should be L minus D, okay? But okay, you can also say F is much larger than D, so I can make like D in this expression. I don't remember, so we see, which is the approximation leading to that formula. Let's see it together. I'm solving the exercise with you. Okay, in principle, it's like this, okay? And now we have to add what? the expression for the energy localized in these triangular domains. Okay? In this part here. But you have a question over there. Is the number of walls that you have, one, two, three, four, A divided by D is giving you essentially the number of walls that you have. Okay? and now you move to the evaluation of the energy cost due to the anisotropy which is localized here in this triangular domain. For each domain e anisotropy so for each domain you have what? The expression for the anisotropy e anisotropy per unit volume will be a, the k which is mentioned here okay my sine square of the angle theta in order to have a union is that which is described in the system and now yeah clearly the theta angle is equal to pi over 2 because you have that M is pointing and that is orthogonal to the easy axis so you have essentially met the cost for a unit volume here is K the optometer cube and now you have to multiply this by the volume the volume of this priest with triangular base so you have now K multiplied by the area what about the area so this is a triangle or size besides is D so the the area of this triangle is d squared divided by four. This is exactly one fourth of a square was, was side is d. So it's d squared divided by four, multiplied again by the h, which is the height, the thickness. Okay? And good. And now again, you, with this, you have just a contribution of a single priest like this, but you have many of them. And again, you can say, but how many do you have? Two times A divided by D is a good estimate, especially if you have a long, say, A which is quite long as compared to D. So this is a good estimate of the number. The factor of two is because you have the first row here and the second row at the top, okay? Good. This is the expression. And now, sorry, what you can do is that I, my, probably it's my memory, but probably this d can be neglected here in order to find that expression. Anyway, the total energy, so the gl, should be something on the order of the sum of these two expressions, which means essentially what? You have now sigma w. So let's assume that you can neglect now the d here. So sigma w by L by H A divided by d plus now you have this factor which is K and now you have what? Okay, this will be K H divided by 4. Okay, divided by 2. KH divided by 2 by A. And multiply by D. Okay? Does it make sense? Yeah, it should make sense. Okay, H is simplified with this. Okay. And now you see, let's comment first this expression just to understand if it is good, if this is a good approximation. So as a general trend, what you find is that if you increase now d, which is the width of each domain here, this is a sort of stride domain configuration. So what do you find? You find that if you increase now d, sigma will now say the energy associated to the domain walls. So if you increase D, this decrease makes sense, okay? Because we are decreasing the surface of the walls, the number of domain walls that you have. And on the other end, if you increase now the D, of course you see that this energy cost increases. And the reason is quite simple. If you increase the D, so you are increasing now the volume of each print. That's the reason why you see this. Okay? It goes like this square. Okay. So this is the expression. So in principle, if my approximation, this can be neglected because L is much larger than D. Now, in order to find the equilibrium configuration, I have to find the minimum for this. So I calculate now the derivative of the GL with respect to D, and I put it equal to zero. So what I find here is that, okay, apart from something that I, so A by H, you see, this expression here is just a constant. So of course I don't need it. So I'm just left with, so it will be minus sigma W by L divided by d squared plus k divided by two equal to zero. Okay, and now from this you find out exactly that expression, so yeah, okay. It's exactly the expression that you find here. Okay, good. So this is the way you can approach the problem. You see, I made many consideration in order to find this very simple expression for the GL and then it was just a matter of minimization of this simple function. But okay, I used many, many ingredients that you have seen in the course in order to find this expression here, to find the model, the simple model, the model for the system. And then okay, in the exercise, the question was okay, so now I put the numbers and calculate the width of the domain in this case. If you want, you can do that, but okay, this is just an application in terms of numbers. Is it okay? No, where is the question? Yeah. Yeah. is x-y? Not too much, as a matter of fact. You see why in terms of charges. Thank you for the question. But in terms of magnetic charges here. So you know that the magnetic charge density is, where is it? So sigma m is m dot n. That's the expression. You have also the divergence of M. But okay, here, so it's not really, sorry, I have a problem here. Here you see that you just have some domains, so okay. So in terms of charges, if you look now at this configuration, you could say, which is the contribution to magnetic charges surface, magnetic charges by this elongated domain. Essentially zero, because there would be some, just some charges appearing here at the vertex, but there is no area here, okay? So in principle, just at the apex, you should find some negative charges here and some positive charges here, but it's just an apex. So mathematically there is no surface at all. So essentially these charges, they do not give a relevant contribution. And concerning these domains here, you see that M is like this, but N is perpendicular. So sigma dot N is zero. So in terms of magnetic charges, surface magnetic charges, this doesn't produce a lot of charges. And also on this side here, the magnetic charges would be zero because M is like this and N is like that. So sigma dot N is zero. So you immediately see that S, so in a closed flash configuration, magnetization tends to align to the edges of the sample. And this is something which is seen every time you look at the at the software microscopy image of a magnetic body. You will find that at the edges the magnetization tends to align to the edges. That's exactly because you want to minimize the appearance of magnetic charges, sigma dot, so m dot here. So and this is a case which really obeys to this general rule, general trends. And in this configuration tends to be parallel to the edges where there is a surface. Clearly in this point, yeah, there will be some charges, but really not in big surface, essentially. Okay, this is a mathematical approximation of the story, but even in practice will be not big contribution. Did I answer your question? Partially, no, no. Yeah. side of this and yeah. You mean here? Okay, okay, okay, okay, okay. So at the domain wall, in the domain wall, there's a rotation, okay? There is a rotation of the magnetization and so there is some localized magnetostatic energy over there. So there will be some localized magnetostatic because at that point the divergence of M will no longer be zero in general. So in principle you are right, there is some cost and this cost is really disregarded in the approximation by Bohr. I didn't make this calculation. In more refined calculation for the domain walls energy configuration you have to take into account also the magnetostatic contribution. This is a sort of rough approximation of the story. But in principle, you are right. At the domain wall, you can have also some tiny magnetostatic energy contribution. And in some other problem, this must be taken into account. But, OK, as a wall here is just a small correction to the problem, which is not determined in the physics. The size of D is not due to what happens at that level. you can neglect it essentially. Okay? Good. Oh, half an hour for this exercise. It's not really good, but okay. This is life. Okay, so now we are ready to move to another lecture, lecture number four, if I correctly remember, which is devoted to hysteresis. So it's a real investigation of the mechanism leading to the reversal of the magnetization and to the appearance of hysteresis in real objects. So as I tried to explain during the first lecture, and now it should be even more clear, hysteresis is not something which is intrinsically connected to ferromagnetism. So you can measure an hysteretic loop or not depending on the way you apply the field with respect to the anisotopy axis. And today we are really supposed to go in more details into this statement. Now, the first point to be clarified is that when you observe an hysteresis loop, this is not just a loop made of a continuous line, especially if you don't make a time average. So if you are fast enough and you just measure, I'll say, a single loop without averaging different loops, which is often done to reduce the signal, to reduce the noise. But OK, let's imagine that you measure just a single loop with a good signal-to-noise ratio. What you see is that usually, well, it's not a continuous line, but I'll say the loop is made of some, I'll say, continuous line and some steps that you see. These are called Barkhausen steps, Barkhausen jumps, and this is the so-called Barkhausen effect. And this is connected to what is called Barkhausen noise. Do you know the reason why it's called Barkhausen noise? Because originally, the way the physicists studied this was using an audio amplifier. So let's imagine that you put now your magnets inside the coil. You sweep now the magnetic field. And how do you measure now the magnetization? You use a pickup coil. A pickup coil which can now collect the signal coming from what is defined as a normal load. So probably it's better if I make a sketch. let's assume that you have now the poles of your electromagnets which are providing you the external field and you're sweeping the field the applied field ha okay so you sweep the field now you have your magnetic body let's assume it's a small cylinder like this and the magnetization is changing over time. Now let's imagine that you place here a coil and you measure now the electromagnetic force, A and B, so you measure delta VAB. Of course, this will be proportional to what? Minus what? The time derivative of the force. this is phi in the Neumann law and you apply H H changes but also M changes which is the flux of B and so phi will be B by A if A is the area of the coil but B is mu0 H plus M so inside the flux there is also the contribution coming from the magnetization so which means that every time there is a reversal of M there will be a variation of the flux which is no more connected just to the part that you are sweeping the field disconnected to the part that is now a more or less abrupt change of the magnetization so during magnetization reversal So if you connect now this to an audio amplifier and then to a speaker, you will see an additional noise, a tone, which is connected to the variation of the magnetization. But if you hear this audio signal, at some point, you see some jumps. You see some characteristic noise, some peaking in the volume. And this is connected to what? This is really connected to these jumps. Because if the magnetization stays like this for a while, and then there is this jump, In correspondence to this jump, there will be a strong variation of the electromotive force, and then you will observe, you will hear now a characteristic noise, this Barkhausen. So you have something which is quite irregular. At some point, you see something like that. This is exactly the noise that was called Barkhausen noise due to Barkhausen effect. What is going on? So this was the first demonstration. the first evidence for that during the magnetization reversal especially if you have an extended body there are some parts of the loop in which you observe the effect of the coherent rotation of the magnetization which means all the spins are more or less parallel and they rotate in a coherent way as we have seen in case of the calculation for the anisotopy field but there is also the possibility that at some point but it's an additional process, and the process is that associated to the motion of the domain wall. So let's imagine that you start from a configuration like that. In this case, what you can observe is that for a given range of field, you see that inside the domain you start seeing a rotation of the magnetization organization group in a coherent way, but at some point you will start seeing what the motion of the domain wall And why the domain wall they do not move because at some point they can be pinned So if you really observe the magnetic film You will see that if you can have access to the image of the domain wall the domain wall they start moving, and at some point, they stop. They stop where? Where is a defect? Any kind of defect, a morphological defect could be OK, or an inclusion of a different material and so on. They stop there for a while, and then they restart after a while. And this is the process giving rise to the Barkhausen noise and Barkhausen effect. But the main outcome from this kind of experiment is that every time you observe this magnetization reversal, so you move from the magnetization pointing downwards to the magnetization pointing upwards, this can take place via two mechanisms. The first one is domain wall propagation. So you have essentially a domain wall with opposite magnetization that move, okay, that propagates and you have the coherent rotation inside the domain wall, inside, sorry, inside the domain. And now let's see some experiments. So these are no more simulation. There are some simulation here but also some experiments. This is a paper that we published few years ago. Okay, so it was just a piece of, I don't remember if it was coffee bee or I don't remember. It should, okay. Other coffee beer, nickel iron. Don't remember the material. I should go back to this. Anyway, it was patterned in this rectangular shape. So it's a film, OK? And the size here was probably on the order of 25 micron by 30 by 20 micron, something like that. 30 by 20. And now what you see here is the measurement of the magnetic configuration carried out by magnetic force microscopy as a function of the applied field. And the applied field was zero, so the remnant configuration 2 mT, 4 mT, 6, 8 and 10 mT applied. okay now the field was applied in that direction okay in this direction so was vertical field and what you see okay these are the experimental results do you know what is the MFM magnetic force microscopy technique or we you don't have an idea so just in a nutshell just understand what is sensitive to MFM in In the MFM, so it is just a version of atomic force microscopy. You have a cantilever, which is used as usual, and typically in this case, it's used in tapping mode. So it moves up and down, up and down at the given frequency that you set. So you have your cantilever, this with a tip, which is coated with a magnetic material at the apex. So you have something which is magnetic here and typically is magnetized or I'll say along it axis so that you have a Magnetic moment M MT is M of the tip Okay, and then this is scan on top of a magnetic material It could be a stripe or something. Okay, it's can and this move up and down and down now it turns out that here you have a magnetic dipole that interacts with what interacts with the stray field produced by this by this guy so what is what is measurable by the MFM is the stray field you are not measuring magnetization you are measuring the stray field and the stray field is localized in which position where you have what where you have some magnetic charges so it could be the edge and now is exactly in line with the question by Fabrizio or where you have a domain wall and why you have you when you have a domain wall if you look especially let's imagine for instance that you have a domain wall like this oh my god but here there are some magnetic charges appearing because this is the M on the left on there and the right they are converging on this line. So there are a lot of positive magnetic charges here appearing and when you have this positive accumulation of magnetic charges, luckily you will have a stray field coming out here. So you have the stray field that will be like this. And this stray field can be sensed by the tip, around the tip. What can be demonstrated quite easily is that it happens that the force as you know the energy interaction energy it will be always minus m dot dot be be arising from this okay so the energy is like this the force it will be proportional to the derivative of this we respect to that for instance what you can understand is that the the force on the side direction will be proportional to m dot the derivative of the m. Now, it depends, but as m is along z, it will be mz, x, y, z, mz by the derivative of b, sorry, with respect to z. OK? And so what you are sensitive to is the gradient of the field along that direction. But the story is that this force, okay, as it depends now on the derivative of B with respect to Z, okay, it sees. So this force is proportionate to the gradient and it causes typically a change in the phase of the oscillation of the tip when the tip is driven in the non-contact mode oscillation. So in the end of the day, without entering the details of the MFM techniques, if you, for any reason, if you will make some investigation of magnetism experimental, you will have to deal with MFM at some point. But okay, without entering the detail of the techniques, you understand that typically, if you see a contrast, this contrast is associated to the gradient of the field B. So when you see an image like this, you see this black contrast that you see here, this is really associated to the domain wall appearing in your material. So you see this shape here, which is quite peculiar, but what does it mean? So you can better understand now the origin of this signal if you look at the micromagnetic simulation of the same problem. So this is done using new marks for instance in this course I will explain UberMag because it's less demanding in terms of computation capabilities of your computer but okay it's a software which is capable of simulating this the configuration of your problem over time or depending on the applied field. So you take now this configuration in zero applied field in a full symmetric situation you do not introduce any asymmetry which is always present in a physical system and you find that the configuration is like this. What does it mean? It means that here you see a white, brown or yellow triangular domain which is extremely different from that one. This corresponds to the magnetization pointing, I don't know, like an ARC, it's pointing downwards. In this domain, the magnetization was pointing downwards, and in the other domain, it was pointing upwards, and these are the closure domains. So you see like this, so you see a contrast which is different, and here you see this peculiar shape of this domain which is inside. This is a theoretical simulation. In practice, it's not exactly the same. Now, unfortunately, you don't. So the resolution of this computer, of this projector, is not good enough. But here, in a good situation, you could see a trace of what is present in the simulation. It's a tiny signal, but it's somehow visible. So, but the main point is that apart from the technicalities of this work, in case you can go through the real work in literature, but okay, you see that you start a zero field and the system is broken into domains. and the reason that it wants, it wants to minimize magnetostatic energy. And as soon as you increase the field along the downward direction, what do you see? You see the expansion of this domain, the yellow one, and the reason is quite simple because if you apply a field, the Zeeman energy contribution is minimized here and is maximized there. So it's clear that the system tends to evolve towards the situation in which there is an expansion of the domain in which the Zeeman energy cost is smaller. Okay? So where you gain energy. So you gain energy now if you move to that configuration where you expand this domain at the expenses of the other one. Okay? And of course, the domain world is still there. Why? Because that's a way for minimizing the magnetostatic energy, the polar energy. but as soon as you increase the field, you see a gradual expansion of this domain that tends to invade now the whole surface of your rectangular dot. You have a question here? . What do you mean? So what do you want to know exactly the meaning of this? Okay, so now from this color map, it's not easy to see the orientation of the magnetization because this is a color map that typically reflects what? The, oh my God, fantastic, when I need it, it disappears. Anyway, it's already there, okay, good. So this is just a color map where the color scale is proportional to the MX component. So you just see the MX component. So that you see that when it is bright, so this is MX, is large and positive. When it is dark, is large and negative. And here is in between, which means that probably the magnetization is pointing like that. But in the simulation platform, you can also decide not to plot just this color map, but also the errors indicating the real orientation of the magnetization at that point. So it's not completely readable from this, which is the real orientation of the magnetization, but the outcome of simulation is always the vectorial representation of the fields involved in the problem. So just to finish before we take a little break, you see that at some point, the yellow domain invades the whole surface. But you see that there is always some resistance, even here, with a region where the domains are still there. Why? Because, okay, you really need a much larger field in order to completely suppress the domains with antiparallel orientation. And the reason is that, okay, the magnetostatic energy still plays a role. So at some point, you have it. But okay, you see that here, you really see the process of propagation of domain walls. So the inversion of the magnetization, so let's imagine that you're starting out with the field pointing upwards, you will see something which is complementary to this. The inversion of the magnetization, the reversal magnetization, takes place via domain wall expansion, not by rotation of the magnetization. And this is the leading mechanism. Every time the body is large enough to display domain walls, okay? And the story of the Barkhausen jam, okay, and then just to finish this story is that at some point the domain wall can be pinned. So in the previous image, this was not clearly evident, But let's imagine that at some point, you have a physical defect here. This defect, which means, what is a physical defect? You have a scratch, or you have now a cluster coming from, I don't know, a droplet, which came around during the position, something like that. The physical morphological defect in your film, it could be an indentation, an incidental indentation. okay you will see that at this point the domain wall stops you don't see regular motion and then when you increase again the field at some point it will be unpeen and it will start propagating again and this is the reason for the jump scene in the loop the barchausen jumps and barchausen noise and now there are some phenomenological model for accounting for this this is one of that saying that you see that there is some activation energy here which is this spinning energy here so that for instance here it's a sort of model for the domain wall velocity and so on and the speed is characterized by if i'll say pre-factor here by this exponential term in which you see the classical statistics, Boltzmann statistics, in which we had this energy here, which is the Zeeman energy, to be compared with this pinning energy, which is now the way you characterize the strength of the pinning force of your pinning side. This is just a phenomenological formula, but you can easily understand it in the usual frame of activation processes and so on. Okay, nothing really astonishing, just a way for telling you that the pinning force of a defect is characterized by this activation energy, which must be overcome in order to reach now the fact that the domain wall moves again. And that's it, now we take a break, and then, yeah, we will continue afterwards. coffee break if you can ever okay okay okay good so this is an example now of of pinning of a domain wall which is not due to an incidental defect, something that happens because you, okay, it happens. But this is something that you can design. This is a work done in my group a few years ago right now, unfortunately, or by your chance, but okay, this is. And it's a peculiar configuration showing how you can engineer now the pinning of the domain wall in order to obtain a given functionality. So this is not taking example. This is the first paper by Paolo. Paolo was my supervisor during my master thesis, yeah? And then we had this collaboration one years ago. But OK, let's see now the physics. You take now, you build up by electron beam lithography a square ring of permalloy, okay? And it's a square ring which contains here, only as you can see here, for instance, here is place, this is strange. Okay, probably is better here. You see, now there is here a discontinuity. So it is a ring, but okay, from the point of view of magnetism, it doesn't change too much. The fact that you have here just this small interruption here. But okay, from the point of view of the electrical measurement, this is really relevant. Why? Because, okay, now you have this ring. And in this ring, you can stabilize different configurations. and I have an exercise but okay for today now it's just too much what could be the zero so the ground state configuration for this ring in order to minimize the magnetostatic energy yeah is the circulation of the magnetization is really sort of vortex so that so you do not create any domain wall but it's also clear that you can also stabilize this configuration like this one where on this side the magnetization circulates like this and the other side like that this is called onion state onion like the onion you see the shape is like this is an onion shape and is characterized by the presence of two domain walls here okay now if you place here some contacts you see one two three four and so on you can then measure due to this interruption here that you have you to this absence of material because material in this case is nickel iron which is a good conductor and what you can do you can measure for instance the voltage drop across these two leads, I don't know, three and four, when you send some current in one and two. So the current flows like this and you measure here the voltage drop. And due to a phenomenon that is called anisotropic magneto resistance, which is a purely quantum mechanical phenomenon coming from spinobular interaction, we will go through the theory of this in a while, but due to this effect it turns out that when you have a domain wall here the resistance is different with respect to the case where you don't have the domain wall there okay and this is due to the fact that in the anisotropic magneto resistance effect if J the density of current and M are parallel the resistance is larger with respect to the case where J and M they are perpendicular So when you have a domain wall here, you see that the M here in the domain wall is pointing like this, and the gene circulates like that. So when you have a domain wall, you have a low resistance state. When you don't have a domain wall, you have a high resistance state. So it was possible in this case to see by measuring just the voltage drop, to see, to study the domain wall motion. And the corner, that's the interesting part for today's lecture, the corner acts as a defect, is a sort of change in the shape, which is a pinning side, a very powerful pinning side. So just to tell you that you can engineer the pinning side in order to have a point in a conduit, in a structure where you pin down the magnetization, you pin the domain wall. The domain wall moves in a quite regular, very, I'll say, fluid way. till the point they reach this geometrical pin inside and they stop. But the beauty is that you can design it and by electron bin lithography, you can now fabricate a structure where you can pin the magnetization at the given point. So in this paper, this was used to build up a sort of memory and because, okay, now you can store different configuration and here you see. Now let me, okay, this was the onion configuration with the domain walls oriented along this diagonal. And then by applying a field in this direction, what you do is that you reverse the magnetization in the bottom and top sides. And you find another configuration with the domain walls along the other diagonal. but what you see is that monitoring now the EMR so the voltage drop for instance across one and two and one and two is this corner you see that when the domain wall is here essentially you have a low resistance state when the domain wall jumps to the other side you have a low so look a high resistance state so the the voltage increases. But this is a jump, so the domain wall stays here when you're sweeping the field, because it's pinned. And when you reach a peculiar field here, it jumps to the other corner here. And the motion is very fast from this to the other one. But it's really pinned there. And you see this jump. So we have been using this also for of biomolecular recognition, that's another part of my story. So at some point, even right now, so it's quite popular, even though I'm no more really deeply involved in this, it was quite popular to use now magnetic particles, superparamagnetic particles. I will explain the physics of superparamagnetism in a while. So some particles to mark, to label biological entities, DNA, proteins, cells, whatever you want. So that in the end, in the lab-on-chip approach, essentially you want to make a biosensor. What does it mean? I want to recognize the presence of a protein or a DNA sequence in your blood. So what I do is that, okay, I make some sample preparation, and then I can now put a droplet of the sample on top of the surface and then on top of the surface I immobilize the probe which is a sequence of DNA for instance which is complementary to that corresponding to the target. So if there is the target, the target will immobilize at the point where the probe is and if I have a marker like a magnetic beads, magnetic particle, I can then detect the presence of the bead and the presence of this label of this marker will signal the fact that I recognize the presence of the target molecule. This is really the basic concept of biosensing. I don't know if you want one time I will explain in more detail what is this but okay. Here the idea was that the pinning of the domain wall strongly depends on what? On the geometrical constriction which is given by the corner, but it's also given by the field, the local field which is felt by the domain wall. and in a nutshell if you measure now this voltage drop here you see that without the particle which is the black curve you see better at a characteristic field of 250 more or less you have a jump which is really indicating that it's jumping at this field and trust me this is very very reproducible you take the same structure you measure under time you find the same value with an arrow which is much much lower than one hosted is 0.1 0.2 at the limits of your capability so it's a very well defined pin inside because it's geometrically defined it's your cap capability of fabrication which defines this spinning side and then embrace the particle on top you see that this jump is delayed so So at that time, we detected the presence of these beads and also the biological recognition by detecting the jump, the different jump in the field. The reason why you have this jump is very simple. If you have a particle here which is paramagnetic, superparamagnetic means that it's even bigger, the magnetic moment that you find. So it magnetized along the field, but the stray field produced at it magnetic moment is opposite to the initial field, so there is a delay here. But this is just an example taken from literature, which is a quite famous paper, this one. Many groups after our original patents and so on, they started working on that for four years. And it's just an example of how you can really use now the pinning, the geometrical pinning, to engineer now your system in order to obtain some functionality either a memory state here because okay it's a memory this one you have different states that you can prepare at zero or a sensing element but now let's move back to basic understanding of the physics behind it which is essentially now the the main question which we slides tried to answer is this one, which is the critical size, which determines the fact that below that critical size, we have a single domain where we observe a coherent rotation without domain wall motion, bicarbonate jumps, and so on, and above which critical size, we observe the presence of domain walls and the presence of bicarbonate jumps, and so on. And essentially the argument is very simple. You say okay, you can compare two things. Probably it's easier. No, I need probably. What you can say is that now, let's assume that you have just a sphere. So, this is an example, but you have a sphere over a dot, circular dot. Now, it depends on what you prefer with the same. Let's assume that this is uniformly magnetized. And now you have this, which is the radius of the sphere. This is hand. This is uniformly magnetized. What is now the characteristic contribution to the energy here? So the energy here that you will have, the energy will be essentially a magnetostatic energy. Because for exchange, interaction, there is no contribution here. It's essentially magnetostatic energy and being also a sphere, but it's not, but it's magnetostatic energy. Magnetostatic energy can be written like minus mu zero divided by two, the integral of the volume of HM dot M in detail. So this one in condition of uniformity will be proportional to what? So it will be, for instance, for the sphere, you know, this is easy because HM should be one third. So essentially, it will be proportional to mu 0, 6, m squared by m solving more or less the same story. The volume of the sphere. The volume of the sphere that sees. What does it mean? it means that when you have now this configuration of a single domain, the energy will be essentially a volume energy contribution that will be proportional to the cube of the radius, the characteristic size of your particle. okay now if introducing a domain wall which means this is more now you have something which is bigger okay so you have the space for seeing the main wall don't forget that the main wall there a finite width we have calculated yesterday no not yesterday because yesterday I didn't give a lecture but yeah but let's imagine that now you have you create a domain wall and the simplest case could be that I don't know it's just like this oh that was another so it's case B let's imagine that you create here that situation you can say that in this case the energy will be given by what the magnetostatic energy due to the magnetizing field produce here but you can say that as a very crude approximation this can be almost neglected why because it's a closed flux configuration so the magnetization tends to be parallel to the edges of words no no huge field produce so it's very field around plus what the energy associated to the domain wall which is partially due to exchange a partially due to an anisotropy but the energy of the domain wall can be always written like this could begin by the Sigma of the wall multiplied by the area of the walls that you have I know s of the walls but this will be proportional to art the second power okay whatever is now the depending on the shape it will be always proportional to r to the second power. So what I mean is that if you now consider which is the energy, which is the single domain, and this is the energy of a multi-domain configuration, what you can say is that the energy of the single domain goes like r to the cube. So it will be something. and the energy of the multi-domain will go like this. so it clearly appears that there is this critical size here below which the single domain is favored because it goes like half of the cube and above which the single domain is no more the low energy states and the multi-domain is a more favorable situation. This is a very, very general argument coming from just the estimate, crude estimate of the energy contribution coming into play here. And now, depending on the different situation that you can have, you can also try to make some estimation. For instance, here you see something that I already sketched on the blackboard. So if you take a spherical single domain particle assuming that r is larger than the domain wall width, that's something which is relevant. Of course, if the radius is smaller than the domain wall width, no way. There is no space for creating a domain wall. So for sure, one of the first criteria to be satisfied, first requirement is that the side of the body is larger than the width of the main wall. Otherwise, there's no domain wall. It would be always a single domain. But apart from that, there is also this general requirement. So you can say, OK, I consider the state A, which is the state of the single domain, with just the, OK, there is exactly my calculation. that one leading to this expression 2 over 9 mu 0 pi m squared by r to the cube and then you say okay let's consider the case b and what you can roughly say is that magnetostatic energy is approximately zero and now you have these domain walls corresponding in terms of surfaces to two circles okay at 90 degree so if you want to express now the the energy cost it would be two times pi R to the second you have now two circles okay multiply two disks or not to circle to disk okay like this at 90 degree to pi R to the second by Sigma wall and so it's just a very simple mathematical argument you You say, I have a single domain, only if aA is more than ab. And this leads to this expression that r must be lower than this critical side, which is 9 sigma divided by mu0 m squared. But it gives you really an idea of the terms coming into play when you have to characterize and find these critical radius. So you clearly see that the larger the energy density associated to the domain walls and the larger the critical size. This is clear. If the energy cost for creating the wall is large, the system will stay in a single domain for a wider range of the radius and so on. And you can also consider other kind of approximation, but I will not insist on that. Instead, in the remaining part of this lecture, I would like to see with you the Stoner-Wolfhard model, which is a very famous model, not considering domain walls. So this means that we stay now in this range, in the low range for the radius in which the single domain configuration is fabulous. So you have a small particle inside which you assume that the magnetization is fully homogeneous. There is no domain walls appearing there. Okay, nothing. And the other assumption of the Stern-Wolfen model is that there is a uniaxial anisotropy term. So that you can write the expression for the energy, which is the Randolphian energy, which is this one. You see a term representing the Uniaxon is of the case and it's greater of an angle minus the Zeeman term, which is this one. Now, there are different ways for representing the problem, for writing the problem, depending on the way you use now the angles. In the Blundell, the reason for this slide is that you are used to study also in the Blundell textbook. So Blundell uses this expression for the angles. So the idea is that you have your easy axis, which is physically set by the physics of your magnetic body, and you apply a field at an angle h with respect to the easy axis. The direction of application makes the difference. And then the magnetization points at an angle phi with respect to h. This is the definition of the angle by the Blundell textbook. If you do this, of course, the sine of square of the angle theta, theta is the angle between the magnetization and the z-axis. So it will be exactly theta minus phi. And in the Zeeman terms, the relevant angle is the angle between m and h. So here you just have the cosine of phi. Okay, you can do this, but in the end of the day, It is not very, very practical because in the real situation, you never measure the angle phi, okay? You never measure the angle between A and H. What can be more relevant is to have a different reference frame, which is let's use, for instance, in this textbook, which is Bertotti, and I prefer to use this one, in which you say, okay, I have my easy axis. and my field H A is an angle theta H with respect to the easy axis and I measure now the angle M the angle theta between M and the easy axis okay it's the same story it's just a matter of choice I prefer this one so I'm just telling you I will use this one I will show you why I prefer I slide to before this one okay when you write now the GL in this reference frame is a function of of course, of theta and of the applied field. Theta is represented in internal variables of state because now the unique variable is the angle theta because M is uniform and the unique angle is the polar angle theta. And HA is the applied field. So case and square of theta minus zero MSHA, of course I know theta minus theta H, yes, because now the angle between M and H is the difference between theta H and theta. Okay, and this is something which is very common. You move to dimensionless energy and parameters, and the way you do that is quite simple. You just divide the GL by something which represents the energy. And the simple way is to divide by two times K by B. Why two? Okay, it's just a mathematical convenience, but K, dimensionally, is an energy per unit volume, Jal per meter cubed. You multiply it by V, and the two is a mathematical trick, but okay, this is giving you something which has the dimension of the energy. And this is connected to the anisotropy energy of your system. You are normalizing now the energy to the anisotropy energy. This is a choice done in this kind of approach. And when you do that, you discover immediately, and immediately is quite simple here. so let me write down something that's also the field and the magnetization becomes dimensionless so you work in a dimensionless problem which is easy for some reason so you say okay I take the GL divided by 2 times K by V which means starting from the expression above is VK by sine of square of the angle theta divided by 2 V by K and just a factor 1 out survives here and then you have minus mu 0 the M MS magnetization saturation magnetization by the applied field by the cosine of theta minus theta H okay now you divide by two times K by V okay now you have to remember the definition of the anisotopy field the anisotopy field which means the field needed to saturate the magnetization along a direction perpendicular to the easy axis so H anisotopy was defined as times K divided by mu 0 MS so clearly here you are this to to you see this is one over the saturation over the anisotropy field so in the end of the day you add there's the GL so this is the dimensional GL so this mole G is what 1l sine the square of the angle theta minus you have H and exotopy divided by sorry H applied divided by H and exotopy which is now a dimensionless field that we call small H okay it's dimensionless field so it's the field in units of of an isotopic field, multiply by what is now what is left? The V was there. Yeah, because there was one V appearing somewhere here, which simplified with this one. And now I'm done, minus H by the cosine of theta minus theta H. Okay, this is a dimensionless energy right now where you see this dimensionless field in units of the anisotropic field. Then it's just a simple usage of formulas of sine and cosine and cosine of theta minus theta H. So clearly here, so the beauty of this is that you immediately introduce now the parallel component of the applied field and perpendicular component that in the dimensionless field unit behaves like this. h i multiplied by the cosine of theta h, h i by the sine of theta a. and when you now develop this cosine of the difference you will find you know is okay the cosine of the first by the cosine of the second minus the sine of the first by the sine of the second you get this expression okay and now you have an expression which you recognize that if you have both components the situation is a little bit complex because now you have a cosine and the But if you are just one of the two, situation is much simpler. And in the end, I would just like to show you that one of the cases responding to just the presence of one of the components is something that we have already solved. It's the case of the calculation of the anisotropy field. because now if you assume that your field is just perpendicular to the easy axis you are coming back to the same mathematics of the exercise that we saw for the anisotopy field so if you just consider that you have what h a perpendicular so you just keep this term you cancel out this one and you find the problem which is exactly something that we already saw which is not this one sorry but this one you take H a perpendicular to the easy axis and now I will not comment this one you can go through this slide what is very very intuitive it's very simple we already see this so in principle certain principle we did already see this in principle is not so but okay the story is that you are this one you try to mean him to to find in the stationary point calculating the first derivative and you calculate the second derivative and then you check the stability for a different solution and you find exactly what we have found okay so it's really a linear behavior between the dimensionless field which goes from minus 1 and plus 1 yes because we found something that was linear between minus H anisotopy and plus H anisotopy and now as you have this dimensionless field which is the field normalized to the anisotropic field this means that the linear behavior is between minus 1 and plus 1 but the mathematics is exactly the same I will not repeat this is just a trivial exercise what I'm interested in before we close this lecture today is to see the other situation the other case that we didn't see before which is the case of the real history is appearing when you have the field which is applied parallel to the easy axis okay is parallel now so if it is parallel you keep the parallel component of the field here and the difference is that in the previous situation of the anisotropic field we had a sine of theta now it's a cosine of theta which changes little bit of mathematics but it changes the physics but today we will not see the physics just a little bit of mathematics for the physics let's wait for tomorrow when I will show you now the energy landscape using math but today I don't have time for doing this but okay now you have this this expression for the gel you calculate the first derivative so you have sine of theta cosine of theta here plus H A by the sine of theta now you can collect in front of everything the sine of theta you recognize that one family of solution is given by the sine of theta equal to zero which is theta equal to 0 or equal to pi which means m parallel or anti-parallel to the z-axis. From this you have these two solutions. And then you have a second solution coming from cosine of theta plus ha equal to 0. That should be cosine of theta star equal to minus ha. Now these are just stationary points they could be maximum or minimum. You have to check for the stability. So you start, for instance, for the stability and for doing that, you have to calculate now the second derivative and this one, the second derivative of sine of theta, cosine of theta being sine of 2 theta divided by 2 is cosine of 2 theta and then you have plus h a, the cosine of theta. Okay, good. And now let's check for the stability of the different solution. And let me build up this loop with you. So you have now the first solution, which is theta 1 equal to 0. And now you check for the second derivative for theta 1 equal to 0. And what is the value? and the value is this one so you have to fit is the cosine of 0 which is 1 plus H a in order to have now because the cosine again the cosine theta it's it's again it's again what what a disaster okay so now you have to say this one must be positive in order to find the minimum but this means that H must be better than minus 1 let's plot now what the M parallel and parallel what is M M parallel is, don't forget, you see the easy axis, okay? And this M and the angle theta, what is the angle theta? Is the angle that you defines the angle between easy axis and M. So M parallel is proportional to the cosine of the angle theta, especially the small M, which is the reduced magnetization, is exactly the cosine of the angle theta, okay? Don't forget the reduced magnetization is magnetization divided by the saturation magnetization. This quantity. This is M parallel. So the cosine of theta is for theta 1 equal to 0 should be 1. And this is a stable solution for H from minus 1 to plus 1. okay this is the solution corresponding to this first first family so theta one equal to zero corresponding to the parallel component of the magnetization which is the cosine of theta which means one is a stable solution for minus one two plus infinity in terms of field and which is just the first family now to the second family which is theta 2 equal to pi now you move to the calculation of the second derivative for theta 2 equal to pi and you find that in this case it's like different so it's 1 minus H a minus H or H a as you want and not I don't No, it's HA. I use HA here. Okay. Sorry. This must be greater than zero. This means that HA must be lower than one. Okay. So for the second family, which correspond to M parallel equal to minus one, because it's the cosine of Y. So you have minus one. so this solution is stable for minus infinity to plus one so this is theta one and this is theta two okay and then you will have the second the first family of solution which is that corresponding to this equation here. Theta star. But cosine of theta star equal to minus HA should be something like that. Which is unphysical. And from the point of view of the mathematical calculation, you can go for the calculation of the second derivative of the GL for theta star, which gives you this expression and then you replace something you find minus one minus HA square. Then you repeat the calculation, you will convince that is like this. And this is negative. Why it is negative this one? The argument is this. So HA must be in magnitude lower than 1 for this class of solution. Okay? Because the cosine of the angle is bounded between plus 1 and minus 1. So when you consider this familiar solution, HA is just between minus 1 and plus 1. So this is a solution which cannot be valid for HA on that side and on the other side. But if you are between minus 1 and plus 1, 1 minus HA squared will be positive, but there is a minus sign in front. So this is a negative quantity. What does it mean? This is a stationary point, but not a minimum. This is a maximum. So this means that the system will not visit this maxima here. And so what is the possibility? Let's follow now the evolution of the system. You start from very large negative applied field. You start from here. And so the magnetization is pointing down. You increase the field. You reach the zero. but the magnetization doesn't jump to positive value it stays with the remnant this is the remnant remnant net magnetization pointing down and even when you move to positive field it doesn't jump, it doesn't reduce it stays there, stable up to plus one and then when you overcome this plus one, there is just one possibility, to jump into the other states. And so there is an abrupt transition, a vertical transition, leading you to the other states. It jumps to the other states, which is this one. You increase the field again. You're sweeping the field from negative to positive, and you find something which is stable, because in this case, the reminisce in this model for this specific situation, the remnant magnetization is equal to the saturation magnetization. There is no difference at all between the two quantities. Then you reach the saturation, but it doesn't change. And when you go back, it's the other way around. You stay with the up magnetization even at zero, which is the other remnant state. And when you reverse the polarity of the field, when you cross the zero, you stay with the magnetization up till you reach the minus one. and then, okay, there is nothing here and the unique possibility is to jump into the other state. And so you have this abrupt transition to the negative states. Okay? And this is so, ladies and gentlemen, this is the Sturges loop when the field is applied parallel to the easy axis. And clearly, this is a configuration which is ready for which kind of application? Memories. Why memories? because at zero you have two different equivalent states. This one and the other one. M up, M down, zero, one. And this is really the basic foundation of the physics of each kind of magnetic record. Provided that these two states are separated by an activation energy which is much larger than KBT, the two states that you write under the one or the zero that will be stable over years. And then you can use it as a magnetic storage element. But we will see that tomorrow, okay, in the following part of this lecture. And enjoy your Thursday. Today is Thursday, yeah.