 So we can start our lectures. So we are here in the last lecture of the relevance of effective masses and so today we will continue on this. So let's refresh some of the things I said there is in the last lecture. So, at the beginning of the lecture we will focus on effective masses for electrons, for the conduction wave. So let's take a generic semiconductor. We know that we have some valence band states. Then let's suppose we have a reduction band minima here at some point into the WN zone, which is called K0. So if we take the expression of the one dispersion for the state, we can always develop it in data series. So let's say that this value here is E0. You get E0, then we will have the first derivative first derivative of the energy kx multiplied by kx minus kx0 which is this value k here and since we are dealing with minima and we are interested in minima of the conduction when all these first order first derivative terms are essentially zero in my Taylor expansion So I will have only second order terms which look like this. Then I will have identical terms from the other three directions. then z term should not be right. So if I pick up s direction, x, y and z main axis of the cubic system, essentially I will have only this term, so I will not have any terms where I need to take into account the in the two directions of this in a cubic system if x y and z are the cubic direction all these terms are also zero okay so looking at this expression here i can define an effective mass in this way. So let's consider the effective mass in the x direction. I can define it like this and the same would be valid also for the y and z direction so eventually I can describe my band structure around this minima as essentially energy of a free electron propagating with a mass which is no longer a free electron mass but is effective mass and the same will be true also for the two other directions. So if I look at this expression here, I can essentially compare it to the expression of ellipsoid in Cartesian geometry. So an ellipsoid has the following expression where A, B and C are the semi-axes of my ellipsoid. So you see that if I move from the real space of Cartesian geometry to the reciprocal space of our band structure, you can clearly see that I can represent my band dispersion using isoenergy surfaces ok, so if I set this ek minus zero to some constant value E bar, my free electron effective mass of a dispersion can be written like this. All right. Okay, so you see now this is also the expression of an ellipsoid in a reciprocal space and And the semi-axis of this ellipsoid are essentially, so A will be the root square of 2 mx e-sined divided by h-bar and so on. essentially the semi-axis are proportional to the root square of the effective mass in that given direction. Okay? So a very convenient way to describe my effective mass anisotropy is for example taking the direction in reciprocal space, let's say z, kz actually, and represent here my isoenergy surface, and this will be kx and ky, and so the distance here between the center of my ellipsoid and this, so this semi-axis will be related to Mz, and let's say the other two will be related to My and Mx. Okay, so with this we can very conveniently represent the effective masses in different materials. So this is a generic case and these are the cases of silicon and germanium. So we see that in this way we can visualize the six-fold degeneracy of a delta valley and we can also see that these ellipsoids are elongated along one direction and smaller in the other direction. And we will see how this has been later, we will see how we can experimentally determine this. So the key idea is that if I take out one piece ellipsoid, I will essentially have a longitudinal mass in one direction which is larger than the transverse mass empty in the other direction. since the system is cubic, these two effective masses in the x and y direction are the same. There is no reason why if I look at this ellipsoid in this direction or in the other, I would have to see a different scenario from the crystal point of view. And so also every physical properties will be the same. So actually in a system like this I don't need three masses, mx, my, mz, but I only need two numbers. So the longitudinal one and the transverse one, right? And in germanium the situation is pretty much the same, the only difference is that now these ellipsoids are oriented in different directions but again I can point out the longitudinal direction along the 111 direction and to the transverse direction, there I can take them any direction will be the same and we have the same two masses. So the numbers for these two cases of silicon and germanium are these ones. So we have a longitudinal mass of silicon which is close to 1 and 0, and a transverse mass which is much less, 0.19. And for germanium, the difference between the two masses is even stronger. So we have an effective mass in the longitudinal direction, which is more than the electron mass in free space. So it means that essentially the crystal potential is slowing down electrons. So what the effective mass represents is a very compact description of the band structure. So it means that they have a... If I look at this, trying to represent here the band structure of germanium, it means that in this end point the band will be extremely flat, giving me a very large effective mass. But if I look in the other direction, I will have a very steep parabola, giving me tiny transfer mass. So this would be very very long, very very elongated ellipsoids. And we will see later how actually people got to know these things in the 50s century. Of course we have also a simple case of gallium arsenide where the minimum of the conduction is at the gamma point. So we have seen here that isoenergy surfaces are actually spheres, meaning that the effective mass is the same in any direction. So we have this very simple expression representing the band expression. So let's assume we know this, we know this anisotropy, the conduction band of silicon and germanium, and now we want to know how actually this anisotropy and also the multivalent degeneracy, how they impact conduction. So let's say we want to analyze the effects of anisotropy and multivariate on conduction. Okay? So, static conduction, we need to recall a few concepts you know probably from previous lectures. So we know that if I have an electron which is under the action of an electric field, electron will gain the drift velocity and the relation between the electric field and this drift velocity is the electron mobility, which is, if you use a very simple truth model that you've seen probably already in your electromagnetism studies, this would be equal electron charge scattering time divided by the mass, so in this case, or effective mass. Okay? So this leads to a definition of the current density, which is equal to m, n, which is the number of carriers per cubic centimeter, so carrier density, the charge of the carrier, so the elemental charge of the electrons in our case, and the drift velocity. So if you take the expression for drift velocity and the definition of mobility, you get this and Q squared tau divided by n star times the electric field. Okay, so this collection of number here is essentially what we call the conductivity of our sample. Okay, so let's apply this concept to our anisotropic effective mass. So let's consider for example one valley which is oriented like this upward on the screen. So here we will have this longitudinal direction and here I will have these two equivalent transverse direction. Now I apply a generic electric field. K, E. And this electric field will have different projections on the different axes. So let's call this angle alpha, this one beta, and this one gamma. Okay? So it means that if I now want to calculate the current in my system, I will have different components of this curve. So I will have, say, current related to motion in the transverse direction, and this will be proportional to N, Q squared, tau, divided by my, so that's the first first longitudinal divided by ML then I need to take the projection of the electric field in the L direction so we'll have something like modulus of my electric field multiplied by the cosine of gamma okay then if I want to calculate the current in one of the two transverse directions, I will have something like this, multiplied for example by cos beta or cos alpha, depending on which of the two I'm considering, and multiplied by E. So what you see now is that these two coefficients are not the same. So this number, this one, the conductivity along the L direction will be smaller than the conductivity in the transverse direction because effective mass is larger. And so it means that eventually current will be no longer aligned as the electric field. So if I apply an electric field in this direction I would get the current J in another direction because these two coefficients are no longer equivalent so when I add together different components they will not have the same value. Okay? And this would be the effect of, let's say, anisotropy on our conduction. But now we need to take into account also the degeneracy of the conduction band. So when I apply an electric field, I have conduction not only from this valley, but let's take the case of silicon which is simply in the yaw. I will have conduction coming from the different six values. Okay, and so if I take a generic electric field again, E, this electric field will have different projections of the different axes I'm considering. So let's use for this purpose polar coordinate, so I can define this azimuthal angle, phi, and the polar angle, theta. So if I use, call this kx, ky, kz direction, my electric field will have the x component which is equal to the modulus of the electric field times, I think it's sin theta cos phi. We have the wife component, which is sin theta. So phi, let me just, let me do it right, yes. and EZ will simply be E cos theta. Okay? So now I need to compute the different contribution given by this electric field by the different effective mass in the x direction, for example. Okay? So in the x direction, I will have that each one of these masses contains an equal number of electrons because they all have the same energy in the mass structure, they are degenerate. So if n is the total number of electrons in each one of these valleys, I will have n divided by 6 electrons. If I have 10 to the 18 electrons, each value will contain one sixth of this 10 to the 18 per cubic centimeter. Okay, so this will be the number of carriers. They all carry the same charge. They all have the same effective mass. sorry, the same scattering time, but they will have different effective masses. So if I project E in the x direction, I will have the x will be like this, and you see that I have two valleys, which are these ones, where conduction takes place along the longitudinal direction, and so I will have to use the longitudinal effective mass for describing the conduction in this values so I will have two times ml. But if I now consider how conduction takes place under the action of this X electric field in the other four values, you see that now conduction takes place along the transverse direction in this case. So we'll have four valleys which are these fours where I need to use the transverse effective ones. So each one of these valleys will contribute differently to conduction and here I will I will have my dx component of the negative field, and I can a bit simplify this expression, writing it like this. Okay. Now, if you do the same for the remaining direction, you will see that you get exactly the same dynamic expression. Because in any case, in any direction I take of the electric field, I will have two isoenergy, two valets contributing with the ML mass and four contributing with the m-key mass. So also in this case, I will have something like this. Okay, and now I don't need to go through the full calculation using this angle, but essentially you can immediately notice that these coefficients here, they are all the same. And so it means that when I take into account the degeneracy of the valley, I will get back to the original results where the current SFC in direction of the electric field and the conductivity is now really like this Okay? So if I now compare this expression with this one, with the one I would have had for an isotropic medium, for example for gallium arsenide, I can essentially write this in in a similar way where m-sigma is what I call conductivity effective mass and by comparison between these two expressions is defined like this. Okay? So for example in the case of silicon, we know that ML is equal to 0.98, MT is equal to 0.19, and its conductivity mass returns 0.26. something in between but it's not the arithmetic average, it's what is called a harmonic average, where the average is essentially the inverse of the quantity itself. For germanium the expression is exactly the same, even though the multiplicity is different, you see that what matters here is essentially the fact that I have one transverse mass and one longitudinal mass. So if you think about it and take it, instead of taking the x and y and z direction, the one one one direction as the principal one, you would get essentially the same kind of formula. And now this will be what happens. So eventually we get a condition of 0.12, which means if you consider similar scattering times, electrons in germanium will be two times faster than in silicon, because this number is roughly two times this. There is an interesting, so this is what I essentially stated here. I would like to draw your attention to an interesting phenomenon that you can observe also by semiconductor, where this isotropy that we have covered, so what we have seen, is essentially that if I consider a single valley, I would have an anisotropic conduction, so the direction of the electric field and of the current would be different. If I put together the multivalent structure and the cubic symmetry, I will again recover an isotropic conduction in the conductivity effective mass, which is this harmonic average over the longitudinal and transverse mass. But there are some phenomena for a bio-siliconduct where this unisotropic nature of the isoenergy surfaces comes out. This is a plot actually, it's been re-edited but it's from a paper of the 50s, where we have the electric field in this direction and the drift velocity in the other direction for silicon. and the current, the electric field is applied along three different crystallographic directions 111, 110, and 100. Here we go to fairly high electric field. see that up to this value the conduction electrons have the same velocity in any direction and they have a linear relation between velocity and the electric field. So here our model where V is proportional to E, the mobility applies. So the coefficient of this line is essentially our mobility. Then we see that with crazy electric field we have two different effects. So one is that the relation between velocity and the electric field is not linear anymore, so I have some saturation, right? And the other thing is that actually conduction becomes unisotropic. So I have different conductivity in the 111, 110, and 100 direction. Here I even have, say, a decrease in the velocity and then try this again. So let's try to understand why this happens and let's focus on the 1-0-0 case. So this strange behavior where the mobility goes down then goes up again. And apply what we learned to this escape case. So let's consider... So I have two sets of valleys, then also goes sticking out. So this is the kz direction. Let's assume that I apply an electric field only in the z direction, which is the 401 my data here which is equivalent to the 1 0 0 so it's a domain crystallographic direction okay so in this case we know that the current running in the z direction will be equal to the electron which are in this z valley times q squared times tau divided by the longitudinal mass times E z. And then if I look at the, so I would have this contribution from this Z-valley, we'll call it, this valley, let's call it one. This will be equivalent. And then I will have also a current flowing through these other valleys, let's call them And in this case, I will have the electron residing, so let's call this 1 and 2. I will have the electron staying in these two valleys, contributing with the transverse effective mass. Okay? And I know that this will not break if the electric field is small enough, I would have an isotropic conduction, no difference in direction. Let's consider now the power associated to this current, so the Joule effect associated to this power. So in the one valley I would dissipate power P which is equal to JZ1 times Z, the current density times the electric field so this This will be the power per unit volume and this will be equal to n1 q squared divided by mL e squared. And now let's calculate the value of power dissipated instead in the type 2 values. This will be jz2, z, so it will be equal to m2, q squared, tau, divided by mt, e z squared. So again if you look at these two expressions, you will see that this number is lower than this one because the effective mass here is larger than this one. So the dissipating power P2 will be larger than P1. So this means now that the electrons in the two valleys, the N2 electrons, will get hotter. So I will not have a single Fermi level in the six valleys. But the temperature, the local temperature, let's say, in the two tight valleys will be higher than in the other ones. And if they get hotter, what happens is that I will have a transfer of electrons from these type 2 valleys to the other one, which are quarter. Okay? So what happens is that we'll have an electron transfer from N2 to N1. okay and when this happens I will add a drop in conductivity because the electron in the one valley are actually slower because they have a heavier mass in this direction so let's represent this let's draw our isoenergy surfaces in this way so I will make these two valets fatter because we have more electrons in and these other valets thinner because they have less electrons okay so now I will not have an equal distribution of n6 electrons for each valet but we will have more electrons in in the valley where the conduction is lower. So this will slow down the motion and so reduce conductivity. So this is what we observe here. Okay, at some point I have an electron transfer between the different valleys. They, so the conductivity decreases and then the electric field increases again. Okay, so this was the case of the 1, 0, 0 you can have a similar effect, but less strong, for a field applied in the 110 direction. But again, this is a trace from old physics from 70 years ago, of a multi-valley natural and anisotropic band structure of silicon. A more recent application and example of this comes from this exercise. You can find it in the appendix of the book and it was also an exam given a few years ago. These are data from this paper from 2012, and essentially what happened here is that we have a silicon L-type crystal, which is conducting through electrons. The glucose put is an angle-envil, so you typically have diamond tips pushing your sample from the top so you can reach fairly large compressive stress and while pushing this crystal the authors were also measuring the conduction in the same direction. So we have stress applied along 001 and also current flowing on 001. And what is reported here is one of the figures of this paper, where we have essentially the ratio between the conductivity G, so this is what we have called so far sigma, well this is the conduction, let's say, but it's proportional, it's basically just the matrix we can do, normalized to the value G0, which is the conductance without stress. G0 is no stress conductivity, okay? And so what this plot means is that when I start to push my crystal, The conductivity decreases because this fraction becomes smaller and at some point it doesn't change anymore. It becomes flat by roughly around 1 gigapascal. I have a flat behavior and this ratio here is essentially this number I have imported here. It's around 0.33. So let's try to understand and guess what's happening here while the conductivity decreases and why it saturates. So we know that if I don't have any stress, the conductivity of my system, what is called g0 and this paper is essentially n, say divided by 6, which is the number of electrons in each valley, q squared, tau, and then we have two pockets of electrons which are in the mL valley and 4 which are in the transverse valley. And this happens because in my pen structure of unstressed silicon, if I take for example k-zine direction, here an equivalent kx or ky direction, these valleys, the delta minima, have all the same energy, so we are degenerate. The electron will sit equally in each of them. Now, if I apply some stress, what happens is that the kz and ky direction are no longer equivalent. So two directions in the plane, my stress will be equivalent from the same to my stress. But one in the z direction will be different. So these two x and y will have the same lattice parameter in the plane, but they will have different lattice parameter in the z direction so I can expect that this delta valley will have a different energy than the one in the x and y direction so I can have only two possibilities okay so let's say that this is the delta valley in the x and y direction, I can have that this one has now a larger energy, the one in z, or has a lower energy. This is the only possibility. I know that it must be different because the symmetry of the crystal has changed. I don't know if it's going up or down. So So let's see what would happen in one case or the other. So let's consider this green case where the delta values in the z direction have a higher energy than the one in the z direction. So if I have a higher energy, what happens is that I will have more electrons here in the other valleys, and very little electrons here. So now they will no longer be equally divided. I will have more electrons in this valley, which has lower energy, fewer electrons in the other valley which is a higher energy and the stronger the stress is the more the effect will be visible. Okay so if this happens what will happen to our conductivity? So at some point I will reach saturation case, I see saturation in my data where essentially I will have no electron here, but all the electron will be in these values because this state here will be very high energy, it will be empty. So if this happens and I apply an electric field in the Z direction, the current will become something like, I will have all the electrons which are now in only four values and they all conduct with mass which is N transverse okay so my conductivity G would be N Q square tau divided by the transverse mass. So it would be higher than G0, okay, because the transverse mass is smaller than... so here I will have an average where I also have longitudinal mass which means this factor becoming larger, sorry, smaller, and here I will have only very fast electron, the transverse electron moving. So this is not what happens, so if this wouldn't be the case, the graph here should have been like this. I should see an increase in conductivity, not an increase. So, the only other possibility we have is the opposite. So what actually happens is that under this stress configuration, the Z delta valley goes down in energy so actually all the electrons are here so I end up in a situation where conduction takes place only through these states so all the electrons are here the other states are empty in this situation so G in this case will be N Q square tau divided by ML okay so this will be actually smaller than G so what happens my graph is essentially that as I start to apply some stress, the electrons move from the xy valley to the z one because the z one goes down in energy and will warp and at some point I will have no electrons in the upper valley, the x and y valley but only electrons within the z valley. Please, I think some place here it's written that this data taken at 8 Kelvin. So thermal energy is not, energy separation is not very strong. Okay? So now we understood qualitatively what happened. So we learned from this data that actually if I apply stress in this direction, valid direction of application of stress goes down in energy and the other goes up and they have a transfer of electron. Let's try to now do some numerical calculation and consider a different initial effect. So let me write down the two mean expression we need. So this is G0 and this is G. And actually another thing we have to consider is that these scattering times can be different in the two situations. So I will call this tau and I will call this tau s. Why they can be different? Because actually if you look at this one of the plots I've shown many times, many times like this one, let's make it here, once more. When I have no stress I have a very efficient scattering mechanism which is called the intervaling scattering because if I have a scattering event which takes an electron from this point of the conduction band of reciprocal space to this point, this transition here takes no energy. So the energy exchange is zero. I only need some momentum. So photons, which have very little energy but a lot of momentum, can actually scatter very efficiently electrons from one valley to the other. So in a situation like this I have this scattering events where essentially an electron here have five different possibilities five final states you can access without any energy exchange but only with some momentum exchange. Okay if I now consider the case of our stress silicon now I can only have this kind of scattering event. So the number of valleys which every electron can choose as a final state is reduced. So here I have a 5 possibility for this electron to scatter the different valleys and here I have only one possibility for this electron to go here. So this interval scattering reduces. So what I expect is that tau s, the scattering time for electrons in the strained material, will actually be longer than tau. scattering time for electrons in the unstrained material. So this event will be less probable and so the scattering time becomes longer. So let's see if this is true and try to estimate its number. So let's calculate with our formula. the ratio between G and G0. So G in our case is m Q squared tau scattering divided by the longitudinal mass and G0 is N Q squared tau times one third one divided by ML plus two divided by MT. Okay, so I can take out different quantities which are the same and I end up with an expression like this. Here this is equal to tau s over t0, and here I have this and here is this. Okay? So from, we know the value of ML and MT. We know that G over G zero is this quantity here that can be taken from this picture, so it's 0.433. So I calculate the ratio between tau s and tau 0 from this expression, so this will be g over g0, 1 ml plus 2 mt divided by 6, 3 ml. and you should get a number which is approximately 1.6. So indeed scattering time gets longer. So this is interesting physics but you can also do interesting technology which was actually done before this paper because at the beginning of I think it was 2002, 2003, something like Intel presented this kind of devices. So it was a 90 nanometer node, now we are around 12, 7, so. And what you see here is the NMOS and the PMOS. So NMOS is the one where electrons are in the channel. So, CMOS technology, you know, C stands for complementary, because you have both N and P type carriers, so you have the two MOSFET coupled together. So this is the electrode device, and this is the whole device. And let's for the moment focus on the electrode device. So what you see here is a monstrum, so you have source and drain, which are these two dark spots, which have been implanted with a lot of electrons to make the contacts. And this is the gate stack. Okay, so I have some oxide and then metal on top. And this is the channel where the electrons are flowing. So this image doesn't have any scale, but it means that this distance here is 90 nanometers. 90 nanometers. The gauge dimension is 90 nanometers. And what the people in Intel did, they applied, they deposited on top of this, this high stress film, which is essentially silicon nitride, which is a polycrystalline material, which internal stresses and this film is actually stretching silicone, so applying a tensile strain. So if we look at the strain configuration, what happens is a following. So let's say silicone is a cubic material, if we have no stress, and what people in tell it was applied some inside stress so we can imagine that silicon this because I am applying stress this direction now if we compare this with our previous example example, what we had in the other case was that actually we were pushing from the top in our case, but you see the effect of the geometry is not quantitatively but qualitatively the same. So I'm extending the lattice parameter in the plane and reducing it in the z direction. So I can do it in two ways. In one case I apply force from the top, in the other I apply force from the sides. From the top I need a compressive stress, from the side I need a concise stress. But the geometrical change of symmetry that they will be the same. So I can expect similar effect. So I can also expect that now if I apply stress strong enough, I will also reach a condition where only these valleys are filled with electrons, identical to the previous case. But in the previous case, you know, of this physical in the lattice paper, what we see is a decrease of the mobility and of course people making devices they do not want to decrease the mobility, they want to increase it. But how can you do it? So you can apply stress this direction and then also run the current in the same direction so in our MOSFET the current flows this direction which is the same direction with regular applied stress so now if I imagine I have an electric field here in this let's call it y direction you see that now the conduction takes place using the transverse mass which is lighter so now I gain mobility. So the mobility now will be n Q square tau s so we'll have an increase in the scattering time again because of the reduction of this intra-valley scattering divided by empty, which is that smaller than the conductivity was. So I gained additional mobility. So this was the first node where stress was introduced and essentially it was a way to increase, make faster devices because you have a higher mobility without reducing the size of your device because you explained you exploit the stress. We will look later on at what happens in the PMOS where you have holes so it's a completely different story and in this case still strain was used but it's now compressing the stress. So you see that this source and drain here are now made of silicon-germanium, not silicon, so they have a larger lattice parameter, so they push in general in the opposite direction. We will see later why this is relevant. So this is what happens in animals, so I fill only at some point the black isoenergy surfaces and the other one are empty and these are some data we previously taken from the in the intel development technology and so what you see here is the mobility over the electric field and this data here is a conventional silicon device with us without stress. So what is called bulk silicon. So our data from IBM. Okay. Then you see a set of data with the larger mobility. So IBM, 18%, IBM, 20%, Toshiba, 30% and so on. What does it mean? mean. So, and this percentage is a percentage of germanium. So in this case, the silicon channel was grown on a silicon germanium layer, which has a larger amount of spironidium than silicon so when I put on top of this a thin layer of silicon I would get some again some inside stress given by the substrate so it's a different way of applying strain so it's not local it's on the full wafer and of course the larger is the germanium content the larger is the strain you have in your silicon so the larger is the mobility gain because you can get closer and closer to this ideal situation where you only have electrons in the delta balance and so you see that you have like a factor of almost two increase just by applying strain so this basically means that if you keep the architecture of your CMOS exactly the same you have two times faster device just because of this. Okay. So I think we can take a break then we continue discussing issues related to effective mass. Okay, I think we can restart. So we have seen that to describe the bulk structure, bulk inspection in the conduction band of multivariate semiconductors, we typically need to know two-value, two numbers, the two effective mass conversion, two-dern and transverse. And we have seen how, when we do an experiment, for example, around some current for our sample, how these different masses combine to give us a conductivity mass that we can measure in a conductance experiment. And also, a bit more, how we can play around with removing the degeneracy to actually increase the mobility of the sample. So another relevant quantity where the effective mass obscene is the density of state. So if you consider the classical density of state of the free D free electron system, this is given by this expression okay so you have seen it many times that m is this effective mass so this is what the expression we apply when we have a system where we have three electrodes with an effective mass m star so the van dispersion is this. And so if I plot the isoenergy surface for this case, this would just be a sphere with radius k squared. So I will have a spherical isoenergy. So depending on the energy, it will be longer or the radius will be larger or smaller, all the air flow inside the sphere have the same effective mass m star so when I apply an electric field for example they all behave in the same way. And now, so this is for example the case of the conduction band of galio carcini where we have seen that in any direction if you look at the band structure in any direction the band dispersion is always the same so around the minimum you can approximate it the same effective mass. Now what happens in the case of multi-valley in silicon ducts? Here we have seen that the vanishing pressure is not isotropic. So if I look at the, along the O direction in silicon, I will have a heavy mass in the O direction and a lighter mass in the other two directions. So we have the isotropic that we have described for our the ellipsoidal iso-energy surface where we have this distance here which is proportional to the square root of the longitudinal mass and the other one which is proportional to the square root of the transverse mass. So what we would like to do now is compute again this expression, the density of state, taking as a starting point not a spherical system where the effective mass is the same in any direction but in an ellipsoidal system. Okay? So we will use again in some Cartesian geometry so let's record a few concepts. So in Cartesian geometry an ellipsis is written like this. So you see that a, b and c are all the same. You have a sphere, you have the expression of the sphere in the Cartesian geometry, and our sphere in reciprocal space is described by this expression here. So we have one longitudinal direction, and then we have two times two directions where I have a transverse mass. So by comparing this to the expression here, we, in the sepulchral space, our ellipses will have radius, with semi-axis, which are given by this. For a certain fixed value of energy, divided by h bar, and the same for beads. So another information we need to take from Cartesian geometry is volume of this ellipsis. And so the volume of this ellipsis, let's call it k because then we use it in reciprocal space, is given by this expression. And again you see that if a, b and c are equal, we get back to the usual expression for the volume of the sphere. So in our case, the volume of our ellipsoids in reciprocal space, k y, k x, k z, is obtained simply by using a, b and c that we got from this expression. And so we got something like this, so we have two root square root of two for three times, we have this, we have a square root of ml times mt squared we have our energy again at the three and a half power and this will be divided by h bar q so this is the volume of k space containing all the states with energy equal or lower than e So if I want to calculate the number of states, the molecular states inside this ellipsoid, I take my decay and I divide it by the density of state in reciprocal space. we know that we have one state every 2π divided by L, where L is essentially the dimension of the crystal itself. Okay, so these are the number of points in reciprocal space, and then since we have spin the generacy the actual number of L2 states needs to be, I get it by multiplying by 2 so these two comes from spin to generacy, okay? And so if I take this expression and I put it here and I simplify the different values I get something like this Okay? And so now if I want the number of states per unit volume of a crystal, I take this expression and I divide it by L cube, which is the volume of the crystal, so I end up with this. Okay, so this is the number of states per unit volume in real space, crystals or measured in cubic centimeters of electrons which are in one valley with this logitimum and transverse mass and have energy lower or equal to E, which are inside my isoenergy surface. Now the density of states is defined as the number of states per unit volume and per unit So basically I need to take the derivative over the energy of this quantity here. Okay, this way I will know the number of states which are contained in a t-e energy interval. And if I do it... If I do this derivation, I would get 3.5, 1, 3, pi square, inch cubed, times this, times this. Now I can simplify a few factors, like this one, I have two, and I also have it here, and at the end of the day, I end up with something like this. Okay? And so this is the density of states in one valley. But if I have several of these degenerate valleys, let's say the total dose will be this value here multiplied by the degeneracy factor. If I call M the degeneracy, which would be for example 6 for silicon, 4 for germanium, and also 4 for aluminum arsenide. Okay, so depending on which path structure I'm looking at. So total DOS I get is essentially this. this would be m times... Ok? Now, if I compare this value with the one we would get for the simple case of spherical effective mass. So let's call this the DOS mass. I see that I can write down the total density of states for a multi-valley anisotropic semiconductor using a single number which is this m dos and these two things need to be equal so m dos so the field half power is equal to the degeneracy times ml mt square square root of 2. so if i now take this value this will be M times 2 third and here I would get ML empty square as a square So this expression here defines my density of state effect in mass. So I can basically use this simple expression here, but replace with this other different average of a longitudinal entangles and transverse masses. So let's have a look at this number for the different semiconductor we are considering. So for example in the case of silicon, this mdos is 1.09. So you remember the sigma value was, conductivity was 1.26 and for germanium we get 0.55, you remember this was 0.12. So depending on the model we are considering, I have to take into account different numbers. I would like to give you a very simple example of how this density of state and multivalley nature of silicon ductwork can play a role. So let's consider two materials that are good for measuring infrared light. So let's say between 1000 and 600 nanometers. Two possible choices are one is germanium because it's a sorbent in this range and the The other one is indium gallium arsenide. So, germanium is cheaper, it's compatible with silicon. Indium gallium arsenide is complicated to handle, it's too expensive. So, I would say, okay, considering that in both cases I can absorb photos at this energy, I would go for germanium for making this photodetector. Another relevant quantity for photodetector is the dark current. So you choose essentially the reverse current flowing in my photodiode when it's not illuminating. If you look up your notes from the electronics lectures, you will see that in a simple shock diode, the dark current is proportional to the square of the intrinsic carrier density in my semiconductor divided by the doping level multiplied by the diffusion coefficient divided by the fusion length. Let's say that we make a system, we make a very fair comparison, so M can be controlled, D and L also can be controlled to some extent. So the difference between our two photodetectors is that in one case we have an intrinsic caliotensity of germanium, in the other case we have an intrinsic caliotensity of or in the Ugali-Masenari. And the intrinsic current density, so it depends on the density of states, it's not really straightforward, but eventually you can look up again in a direct textbook The role of the mass is following, so this will depend on the mass at at three divided by four power. This dependence comes eventually from the density of states because you can imagine that essentially if you have two bands, one with a small effective mass and one with a large effective mass, if you place your Fermi level here, you will have some electrons here and much more electrons here. So this is how the density of states impacts the intrinsic carrier density. So if I position the Fermi level equally in the two cases, that of silicon and dogemedium, the intrinsic carrier density greatly depends on the curvature of the band of the effective mass and so if you make all the calculation you will get this dependence and this is essentially what we are discussing here is the dose mass okay so eventually the ratio between the dark current of germanium And the dark current. In the new Gallium arsenide, we are seeing that it will depend on the square of the intrinsic current density for the two material. So eventually on the ratio between the two effective mass to the power of three and a half. Because if you take the square 3 divided by 4 you get this 3.5. So now let's look at the two dots. So for germanium if you make the calculation this is 4.55. For indium gallium arsenide is a direct bandgap semiconductor. Small bandgap means small effective mass. The minimum of the conduction band is a gamma, it's a perfectly isotropic dispersion. So we only have one mass for everything, so for the effective density of state and conduction we have the same single number, and this number is actually very small. So when you make this, you get a factor which is approximately 50. So we see that the impact of the effective mass on these devices is quite strong. Whatever I do, I always have this problem. The germanium photodetector would be 50 times more noisy than a medium-value mass-enhanced photodetector. For example, besides technological advantages that I was telling you, all infrared cameras and sensors, most of it are actually done with in-deep radiomarginal. So far, the market of application of these devices has been scientific measurements, military inspection, so fields where people can spend a lot of money. Let's say if we want to put now an infrared camera on a car to improve our safety, this will be impossible with new gallium arsenide. Because a new gallium arsenide camera costs as the car itself. So you cannot actually afford it. So maybe in the future we will be looking for more noisy materials, maybe with cheaper material, but we will have to cope with this thing, lower performances. These are given by essentially the key numbers here you see are the density of state effective mass that we have calculated so far. Okay? Okay. So these are the key, let's say, expression that we have obtained. Table values that can be useful for exercises for example. And so far we discussed about electrons. Let's now talk about holes, as holes are protective masses. So here the geometrical situation is more complicated. So we don't have isoenergy surfaces which are ellipsoids. A mathematical representation of the dispersion of the planar span of a semiconductor can be obtained for example from this expression. So we can still have some formulas which are approximately describing our system, but the situation is not an ellipsoidal form. It's a more complicated structure. What I've done here, I've plotted using essentially this equation here. This 3D plot where in the plane we have a reciprocal space, so this is ky, kz, and in one direction we have the energy. So if I cut this energy in a given direction, I will have a parabolic dispersion in the effective mass approximation. And you see that in any direction I will have a different cut. So the blue line here is a cut along the 1, 1, 0 direction. So you see that we have a parabola with a larger curvature than what I would obtain in the direction which is the red thing. So this is and this is . Okay? We can still get the feeling of how the masses changes from one direction to the other by looking at isoenergy surface. So this is the case of the heavy one. If I cut this figure, for example, along this plane, I will have as a plot, isoenergy surface for this particular energy. So for example, this one. So this figure is no longer an ellipsoid, but still the distance from the center of a preload zone to the particular isoenergy surface I am considering will give an idea of the effective mass. So it will not be proportional to the square root, but let's say the longer the distance, the higher the probability. This parabola here is related to this direction, the and let's say the red parabola in relation to this direction. So you see that in one case you reach before a given isoenergy surface. So the distance between the center of the Brine-Wendt zone and the border of the isoenergy surface, we still give some idea on how, on the relative, let's say, dimension of effective mass. So I cannot tell the value of this, but I can tell you can tell you that in this direction the effective mass is larger than this one. If you plot the other two cases, the light hole and the split-off, you get something like this, which is closer to, let's say, a sphere. So it's typically a very well approximation, even though we use it a lot, to assign a single mass to the every-hole bends over light-or and split-or, this is less of a problem because they look more like spherical objects. So we have seen from this plot that the effective mass in the one-or direction is different, actually larger and the effective mass in the 2-oh-1 direction. Okay? So let's call it M, here I'm talking about the mass of the hole. In the 1-1-0 it's larger than the one in the 1-00 or any equivalent direction. So it means that if I take a silicon wafer and I make a MOSFET device, so let's say this is my chip where this is 1-00 and this is 0-01 direction, I can make a transistor where the source and drain are here and the current flows in this direction between source and drain or I rotate my wafer or the mask, the graphic mask, and then make another transistor, another MOSFET, where the source and drain are here and the current flows along the 110 direction. Okay? And so I would expect, since the mobility in the 100 will be like this, and in the 111, the 110 would be like this. I would expect that this mobility should be larger than the one in the 1-1-0. So I would get faster devices if I just switch my alignment of my lithography setup in the 110 direction. Is this true or not? Here we have two plots. One is related to electrodes, so NMOS transistor. So they are growing on the 1-0-0 surface, which was the one that I was considering before, and we have two types of devices, the one on 1-0-0 and the line 1 and on 1-1-0. And the two curves perfectly overlap, because we have seen before the break that in a void of anisotropy in each valley, the cubic symmetry saves the day, and at the end I have a current flowing in any direction in the same way. So for the N-mass there is no difference because eventually the conductivity, the effective mass, it's the same in any direction. For the P-mass for holes, this is no longer true. And you see that as we predicted with our plot here of the isoenergy surface. The devices, Cloron-100, Align-100, are actually faster with larger mobilities than the ones along 110. So in this case, in any direction, in And the two directions I will have two different conductive. So I will gain something by doing devices along the . Is it surprisingly enough? Actually the choice of the micro-electronic industry, since several decades, to grow, align all the devices along the... actually, the 110 direction. So even though it is less convenient for PMOS, there are other advantages stemming from the fact that 110 is essentially the cleavage direction of silicon. So if you try to break a silicon wafer and it forms chips or dyes, it will break along the 1-1-0 direction and not in the 1-4 direction. So even when you make a wafer, it's far easier to align it along this direction than the other. Also, the chemical reactivity of surfaces is different in one direction than in the other. the other. So what had been the choice has been to lose some mobility for PMOS but gain other advantages under the technological aspects of the fabrication process. Just a brief overview of what we can find in the periodic table. So by looking at this plot we can see that it's generally true that the electron effective mass is much smaller than the whole effective mass so here you see typical numbers for free files much lower than 0.1 and we can see as we discussed yesterday that as a bandgap decreases also the effective mass decreases so if I want to make a very very fast device and something with a very small banding. So you see this is going down. Why in... This is not the case for the all-effective mass. So we see that values are always larger and there is no clear dependence. And so our model, our K.P. model with two bands, failed in predicting this behavior because it's only two bands. So we would have had to take into account different bands in the balance band so every all-light-on is split off to actually get out number which are more in agreement with this. Noticeably, for a reason which doesn't follow any systematics, Gimeno has a very small effect So it's actually the material in the periodic table with the smallest effective mass. So people are trying to actually replace silicon in PMOS devices with germanium. So the general idea is at some point that in my PMOS I would have everything made of of silicon, so the source and drain, and the substrate will be silicon, but here I will have pure germanium to take advantage of a low oil mobility of germanium. actually people is discussing about having something like this, source 3, again silicon substrate and for example gallium arsenide as an end type material again to take advantage of low effective mass here which is much lower than the continuity effective mass of C. Okay. So let's go back to my starting assumption that we did, which was, I told you essentially that multivalves in a conductor, we have this kind of picture. So we have two relevant masses and we have this kind of degeneracy. How do we actually know this? So how do we actually know that we have this degeneracy and in particular how can we measure the longitudinal intranspose Because we have seen that if I put conductivity measurements, I get some average. If I take into account the density of state, I get another average. So I don't have any direct, so far, I don't have any direct access to these numbers. This is actually done by using synchrotron resonance measurements. So this is the way we can use to measure ML, MT, also the high-dysautropy in the balance and also the degeneracy in the conduction band. So all this can be obtained in a cyclotron resonance measure. But before actually explaining how the experiment works, I need to make some introduction, Because in treating this problem we will use what is called the acceleration theorem in reciprocal space. It's a semi-classical model. So I will state the theorem and then we will see how we can derive it, which says essentially that the derivative of a crystal momentum, so hk is the momentum of the electrons inside of block electrons. So this change is equal to the external forces acting on the electrons. So you see that the semi-classical thing is very clear. So this is very similar to the second law of dynamics, Newtonian dynamics, where instead of the momentum of the particle, we have the crystal momentum. And the other interesting thing about this expression is that on the left side, we have one space which is reciprocal space and on the right hand side we have real space so the world we live in where the forces are in the same time and space. Okay, so it's interesting because essentially we will see how forces which act in the real space change in part the trajectories of electrons in the reciprocal space. Okay? So how do we get to this expression? So the first issue we need to solve if you want to treat semi-classically the motion of electrons under some external force is the fact that when I apply some external force this will act in some point in space, so in a region of my semiconductor where for example I'm applying an electric field. So this is from the classical point of view. But our description of the electrons which uses block function tells us that actually the electron is fully delocalized in the crystal, so you have the same probability of finding it in any cell of your crystal. So the probability is equally distributed along, all the way in different cells. So, the first thing I have to do, I actually need to localize my electrons, and also again to look for a solution of the problem where my electron is undergoing some external force by combining the wave function for the problem without the force, which are these ones. So I can do this by actually forming a wave packet where I take some wave function in a small region of a reciprocal space, so let's say that I take the value around some k0 and I span the region plus delta k minus delta k and I add up different wave functions, and each wave function will be weighted over some coefficient, which will tell me which weight every component has. And if I take this weight as a peak function to say that I want more contribution from states around k0 and less from the states around like gaussians, reloyents and functions. It means that the spatial distribution of this wave packet will be no longer that of a spin. I will have concentrated my electrons in some space, in real space. So I will have localized them within a delta r space which multiplied by delta k needs to give something like this so you can look at this as an application of isabelle determination or more simply this is a Fourier transform of k this factor here so the real function function real space so this this would be some function in real space, will be confined over this region, because I'm taking only a small part of reciprocal space. So now, if this is what happens in reciprocal space, k, I will have formed a bucket in real space. which extends over the dimension delta r. And now I try to apply my force to this wave packet which is localized in time, in space so we can talk with the classical world where forces are applied in a given position. So if we ask ourselves the velocity of this wave packet, the group velocity, we can take the analogous from the, say, the optics that we know the group velocity of the wave packet traveling in dispersive medium is nothing but the omega divided by the derived by decay so if we take one h bar we multiply this we have energy and in our case the energy is the band structure of my system so if I look at this in a three-dimensional space I would add that the group velocity is 1 over h bar, the gradient in the case space of my vent structure. So you have seen this formula many times, it's actually what we call the velocity of a blocked wave, but this is not actually the velocity, here we give a different interpretation, essentially the velocity, the wave packet formed by superposing different electronic states in a small region of k, where if I manage to overlap different electronic states to form this wave packet localizing space, it will move with this velocity here. Okay? So now let's use this expression and in the same classical approach. So you know that in classical mechanics the derivative of the energy is the power and it's actually velocity times force in classical mechanics. So now this will be my Venn structure and I can divide this derivative in two steps. So I first take the derivative over k and then take the derivative of k over time. Okay? This would be equivalent to a derivative of the energy over time directly. and this will be equal to our velocity which is now this times the force. So now I can delete these factors and I get our acceleration theorem in reciprocal space. So this is a, was a rather, here we speak, let's say, derivation in a more comprehensive one would require perturbation theory and also some tensile product to make it properly. But we don't have two hours to do this. I prefer to give you an idea of the physics behind it and the fact that now we have this tool which is semi-classical because we have essentially condensed the localized space the electron by adding together different wave functions in a wave packet and we are studying how this wave packet moves under the action of an external force so this will move with the group velocity of this particular wave packet. Okay? So this was the introductory part, now let's move to how we can apply this to cyclotron So how does this cyclotron resonance experiment work? What I do, I take essentially a piece of my semiconductor, and I put it between a magnet, So I have a magnetic field and then I can do two things. I can essentially change the intensity of this magnetic field, so make it weaker or stronger, and also I can rotate my crystal. So I can change the orientation of the crystal with respect to this magnetic field. So what I do is doing these things, I also have a source of microwave. So some gigahertz, which are set towards the sample, and then I have a detector. Okay? And so the kind of experimental graph that I drew during the experiment is the following. So this microwave frequency is fixed, so it's typically, I don't remember the exact number, but it's around 10 GHz, let's say. I fix the direction, so I have a given direction. The crystal orientation. And then I scan the magnetic field, so this axis, I have the magnetic field intensity, and I look at the power detected by my detector. So I look at the absorption of the detector. And what I see is that during this experiment, I will have different peaks. So corresponding to my resonance between the microwave frequency and the cyclotron frequency of my system. So if you recall from your electromagnetic lectures, when you put an electron inside a magnetic field, you will have some circular orbits with a frequency which we call the resonance frequency, which is the electron charge times the intensity of the magnetic field divided by the mass of the electron. So this is what we get from classical physics. In a quantum mechanical approach, you actually have a system which is an equation which becomes identical to the one of a harmonic oscillator. So you basically can be resonant with this frequency, so when the external radio frequency RF is resonant with the secretor frequency you will have absorption or not because you will have quantized state which are equally spaced by this frequency. So this is a formula that we got in a textbook of electrodynamics where you have an electron moving in free space in this direction, you apply a magnetic field and you will have some kind of circular orbit. Now we need to solve the same problem, taking into account the fact that we don't have one mass, that we have multiple mass problems. And we can do this using our acceleration theorem in reciprocal space. So we need to move from this picture, which is in real space, so we have an electron in vacuum traveling, we apply magnetic field, we start with the cyclotron orbit, to actually cast the same problem in reciprocal space. So our equation will the following, we will have derivative of the variation, the time variation of the crystal momentum equal to the external force which will still be the Lorentz force. So simply electron charge times velocity times B. And now the difference is that we will have to look at the motion of our electron. Not in real space, but in reciprocal space. Okay. And actually we can again walk out of our isoenergy surface. So let's plot it here. And let's assume that the magnetic field is oriented, for example, in this way. Before actually solving this equation, we can make a few considerations. So first of all, we know that we are describing a wave packet propagating, so this velocity here is nothing but, again, the gradient of a band structure in reciprocal space. And from definition of the product, we know that the derivative of K must be perpendicular to the magnetic field and must also be perpendicular at the same time to the gradient. Because by definition the result of a vector product is perpendicular to the factor entering product itself. And we know another thing from physics 1, that the gradient of something is perpendicular to the iso something. So the gradient of energy is perpendicular to the iso energy. The gradient of temperature is perpendicular to the iso temperature. the gradient of height is perpendicular to the iso-road surface on the map. So this will be also perpendicular to the iso- energetic surface. So let's take a generic initial time. So we have our electron, which is described by this k vector at some moment. How can the motion evolve? It needs to be perpendicular to the isoenergy, and it also needs to be perpendicular to the magnetic field. So the only possibility I have is actually that the motion takes place on a plane, which is obtained by cutting my isoenergy surface perpendicular to the magnetic field. So this way I will cut, say, an ellipsis on my system, and if you look at it you will see that if I move on this ellipsis I will always be perpendicular to B, and also at any point the derivative will be perpendicular to the isoenergy surface, so satisfies both conditions. So the velocity associated to this, the velocity of which, imagine that this is a ray, r, this will be the velocity, the trajectory of our system. It can only be this one. So our cyclotron motion will take place no longer on a circular trajectory, but on an and the Ipsoidal trajectory. Okay, so depending on the direction of the magnetic field, I will cut my isoelectric surfaces in different ways. So let's say that I have a magnetic field in this direction, so in this case the orbit what we will see is something like this, or if I cut it, it's a, in this direction then the orbit will be an ellipsis where the same axes are proportional in one case to the longitudinal mass and in the other case to the transverse mass. So you can see that by changing the orientation you can get access to these different levels of information. Here we have information only on the transverse mass and here we have information on mixed mass. To see how I can extract this information from the data, of course we need to solve this equation here. And this will be done next time. So let's see here what I have. These are all results we will discuss in the next lecture. So this was the starting point. time we will do the following, we will solve this equation, knowing also this information the energy of my electrons as a function of k is equal to h bar squared kz squared divided by two times the longitudinal mass plus kx squared divided by two times the transverse mass, h squared, p1 squared divided by two times the transverse mass. And so from this expression we can get actually the velocity calculating this gradient so we we will have a different x, y, and z velocity that we can put back in our equation, and so we will have a system of a differential equation where k, x, y, and z are being known of our problem, because it can re-express the velocity also, again as a function of okay so make a simple example dx I need to take the derivative of this expression with respect to kx and so I would get h bar kx divided by m transverse which you see is nothing nothing but the momentum, crystal momentum divided by a mass, so it's a velocity. Okay? And in the same way we do with the others. Then it's a bit tedious, the solution of the system of differential equations, so we'll do it next Monday when we are fresh. Okay. So this was all for today.