 So we finished a couple of days ago with this table where essentially we were discussing in the past lecture on how we treat the anisotropy, so the fact that effective mass is not a single number but we have effective mass ellipsoids and also degeneracy in the conduction band. So we end up with the idea that actually from the value of the longitudinal entranter's mass we can obtain, for example, the conductivity density of state, which is defined in this way, or the density of state, the effective mass, which we derive to be the following expression. Okay, so now let's finish this set of values and have a look at what happens in the balance bank. So here the situation is a bit more complicated because essentially the isoenergy surfaces they are not ellipsoids, but they can be described with this set of values. Here you have the heavy or the light or the split off. These are different coefficients that can be fitted or calculated. And this is the value of the k vector px, py and pz. So you see that if you plot it in 3D, this is a case of heavy or what I plotted here. and you see that the dispersion is rather anisotropic. So we will have for example along the 1,1,0 direction this line here, this blue line here, and along the 1,0,0 this line here. So we see that for example for along the 1,1,0 we expect the heavier mass because we reach essentially the same energy over a longer length in k-space. so along the we have essentially this kind of behavior while if i go along the one zero zero direction i reach the same iso energy same value of energy in a shorter distance for the gamma point. So this means that the mass is lighter. But still we can see that if we compare this three-dimensional plot with this 2D one, we can grasp the idea that if I move from the center of the Brillouin zone to some isoenergy surface, this distance will be not proportional but dependent on the effective mass we are considering. So let's make it in a different color maybe. So this distance here, you see it's representative of the mass along this direction, the mass along the 110 direction, this distance here is related to the mass along the 001 direction or equivalent. So we already found this 2D plot, maybe I switch off the light. So we can see that also from these 2D plots we can get an idea of which direction in which direction the mass is heavier or lighter simply by drawing this line. So the distance from the center of the brillouin zone, this isoenergy surface is longer, it means that the mass is heavier and so on. And if you do the same for, if you do the same plot for light-tolerant split-off, we see that here we recover more something resembling closely, let's say, a spherical surface. So here, for the light hole and heavy hole, the ionisotropy is less pronounced. You still have, in principle, just a cubic symmetry, but you see that it's less pronounced. So the fact that in the heavy hole we have two different masses, even in the valence band, so in the heavy hole state we have two different masses, it means that conduction in these two directions has to be different. So if I run a current along this direction, I will get different conductivity as in this direction. And this is actually the case. So these are two plots of essentially the mobility in two different MOSFETs. So this is an NMOS, so electrons. And this is a PMOS, so it holds. And this is the gate length of the device. What we're interested in is actually, we see that with the gate length, I have an increase of low-feed mobility. This is not what we want to compare. Now we want to compare these two directions. So these are essentially the same lithographic process. So in all cases I will have a source, drain, and the gate, okay? But in one case, if I take my silicon chip, which is typically aligned along the 110 direction side, because these are cleavage planes, so typically if you cut a silicon wafer, it will break along this crystallographic direction. So in one case, let's say in the red case, our device was oriented like this, with source, drain, and gate, while in the other case, in the 1, 0, 0 direction, it was oriented in this way, source, drain, and give, right? And in silicon, in the case of an electron, we see that we get exactly the same behavior, because what we recovered in the last lecture, what we understood, is that even though the effective mass in each valley is not isotropic, the cubic symmetry kind of stays the same, and they have the same conductivity in any direction. In the case of the PMOS this is no longer the case because you see that the two devices have actually different mobilities. Actually we see that the one along 110 has a lower mobility and this is consistent with this thing plot here that along the 110 they have a heavier mass and so the mobility depends on the inverse of the mass. And actually in the direction I have a higher mobility because effective mass is smaller. So it seems a good way also to, for example, make faster PMOS, but actually what's happening in technology is that the text that the key wedge play are along the 110 direction, it's such a strong motivation, let's say from a technological point of view, that CMOS technology is made along the 110 direction. So this is the direction of the device fabrication in CMOS foundry, even though I would get some advantage not the one zero zero direction, but this adventure does not mean, doesn't help really, it brings you a lot of trouble when you need to dice down your, to dice your chips and make your devices. And just as a final remark, let's compare the two bands, the conduction band for electrons and the balance band for holes, and so you typically notice that electron masses, whatever you consider, the conductivity mass or the dose mass is typically much larger than the effective mass of holes. So for example let's take even phosphide, you almost have a factor of 10 difference. So for balanced band effective mass is substantially larger than the one of the conduction band of the electron. And this is the case in most semiconductor. So we have seen, starting from the mathematical definition of effective mass, because essentially we started simply by expressing as a Taylor series the dispersion around a minimum of a preliminary zone, whether it is gamma or delta or L. And so this ML and MT are defined in a rather mathematical way, but how do we actually measure this how is it possible to understand that and experimentally prove that we have a longitudinal and the transverse mass and that they have six-fold degeneracy in silicon and four-fold degeneracy in germanium no degeneracy in gallium arsenide. All this was done. So this is experimentally measured in a cyclotron resonance experiment. But actually before discussing our some experimental data, I would like to show you which is the working principle and the physics behind this experiment. And to do this I need to make a preliminary step and talk about what is known as the acceleration theorem in reciprocal space. Okay? So we know from optics that if I have the wave with a frequency omega, which is not a constant, but it's actually depending on the k vector of the wave, I can define a group velocity, which would be the velocity of the wave packet centered around a certain frequency k value. And this group velocity is essentially defined in this way, it's the derivative of our relation dispersion, dispersion relation sorry, divided by the k value. Okay? So we have something similar also when we go from electromagnetic waves to electrons in a solid, because we know that I can define a velocity, which is essentially the same definition as this one, but instead of using omega, I simply use the energy divided by h bar, so we know that in quantum mechanics E can always be expressed as as, say, h-bar times the frequency. So in this case, I use exactly the same definition. So we get 1 over h-bar, the derivative of the energy along a given direction. And this is actually a rather inaccurate expression from the mathematical point of view. So to make things properly we need to recall that V is a vector, so this thing is actually, if I make it in three-dimensional state, this will be the gradient in case space of the energy. Okay? So this is what is also known as a block velocity of an electron in a solid, but this is the velocity of what exactly? So in the same way as we attributed this group velocity to a wave packet, essentially what we are representing here is a velocity of the wave packet of electrons. So the summation over a region in in reciprocal space, let's say that I want to go in a region which is centered in delta k of some superposition of electrons, and that sum this over k, with some weight k. I can imagine that this is a Gaussian function and so on. So from the... if I look now at the information that this expression is giving me in real space, I have the following, actually. Each one of these waves gives me the same probability of finding the electron in every cell of my crystal. because the electron is perfectly equally distributed around my full crystal. So I don't have one, there's no single reason why it shouldn't be one cell or the other or the other. OK. So if I make a packet instead, I will essentially reduce it, especially or localize, especially my electron. So essentially if we want to look at this from the point of view of uncertainty principle, if I now add this summation along the region delta k in reciprocal space, the position delta x, the determination of this, will be of the order of h-bar divided by 2. So if I take delta k relatively large, I basically reduce delta x. So essentially I'm localizing my electron at some point in real space. So from the point of view of energy, what I'm essentially doing, let's take, let's say, band dispersion like this. This will be my value k0. I'm adding up electron wave function over an interval delta k so I will basically form the wave packet of electron with an energy center around this value here and located in space okay So this is the meaning of this, that we will attribute to this block velocity. So this velocity will be the velocity of this wave packet. Now since I've localized my electron in real space, the next step towards the formulation of this acceleration theorem in reciprocal space is basically treating this wave packet as a classical particle, okay? So where I can apply essentially Newton mechanics to the motion of this particle. So let's suppose that now I have an external force F acting of this electron, what I can do, I can write down that the derivative of the energy in time, so the variation in energy along this band structure here, which is power, in classical mechanics this is defined as the dot product between the force and the velocity of the particle itself. So now I take this expression which is true in classical mechanics and I apply it to my wave packet. So the energy will be essentially given by my band structure E k and the velocity will be essentially given by the block velocity of my band structure. So essentially what will happen is that due to this electric field this energy will move up or down this band structure and my wave packet will describe the electro-motion, charge motion in my system. So to introduce these two relation in this expression I will do the following instead of writing DE over DT I will write DE over DK times k over DT and here I will have 1 over H bar this times now I'm a bit lousy with the notation because to do it properly this would require let's say some the Soria product which is a bit rather cumbersome to get this same final result so here again I will simply put this instead of the derivation in one direction I will put the value of a gradient in K okay and so now I see that essentially I can simplify these two expression and I get to this equation here, which is exactly called the acceleration theorem in reciprocal space. which is a semi-classical approach to describe electron motion inside a solid. And it's a rather weird beast in the sense that on one side we have classical forces which is acting in real space. But actually, these real forces determine the motion of the electron in reciprocal space. Okay, because essentially what we are describing here is again the motion of this electron within a band of the wave packet of electrons moving up and down their energy in this band due to the power imposed, put in or taken, let's say, by the external force. Okay? And so this is what we will use to treat our cyclotron resonance problem. So let's first, slightly describe how these kind of experiments are performed. So essentially you take a crystal of your semiconductor and you put it inside a magnetic film which is a schematic. So these are the two poles of the magnet. And typically in your experimental setup you are allowed to move around your crystal and change the orientation to be the crystal itself. Then you have, basically you measure the absorption of your crystal in the microwave range, so the gigahertz frequency, at a fixed wavelength. So omega is a constant, because it's rather difficult to obtain a resonator, a tunable resonator in the omega, in this range, I'd say, but I think it was when this experiment was performed. it's a RF source with fixed Omega okay And so essentially, if we now take our acceleration theorem in reciprocal space, now in this case F is the exploring force. So it could be Q, the electron charge, times the velocity, times the magnetic field. But this is actually true only if I'm operating at very low temperature, because if I do the experiment at room temperature, here I will have also other kind of scattering. So we'll have phonons mainly. So to actually highlight the role played by Lorentz force, all these experiments are performed cryogenic temperature, so typically liquid helium, so that I kill this scattering. At low temperature I can still have other scattering mechanism in place, like scattering with impurities. These impurities can also be the dopants that I put in my semiconductor sample, so N or p-dopants. So again if I want to be able to perform this experiment I need to use high quality crystal with no impurity or as little as possible impurities. So this means that when I cool down my system I will have no electron at all, no holes at all. So my semiconductor will be a perfectly isolating crystal, because it will have only holes in the balance band and only electrons in the induction band. I don't have thermal energy, because I'm at low temperature to promote carrier, and I don't have dopants to promote carrier. So what is done, you see here there is this light, wiggle arrow. Essentially, you illuminate your sample in such a way that you generate electron-hole pairs by optical absorption. So this would be your valence band. This would be your conduction band. So from this light, you will generate the population of holes and electrons. And what typically happens is that you just need to shine the light for a few seconds and then the recombination time are so longer that the system will be conducted for hours. Of course you can also do everything with the light always on, but typically not necessary. So under this hypothesis I can actually solve my problem using only these two terms. So I can solve the reciprocal space acceleration theorem, just considering Lorentz force. And here, again, I can replace h bar, sorry, velocity with the group velocity of my electrodes. So what we are trying to do now is essentially in reciprocal space, so this will be ky, and kx, kz, solve the motion of an electron which is initially at a certain k value under the influence of this force. Okay? And actually there are a lot of things that we can understand about this motion before actually solving this differential equation, which essentially all comes from the fact that here Here I have a cross product, a vectorial product. So the first thing I need to point out is that the variation of K in time needs always to be perpendicular to the magnetic field and also perpendicular to the gradient of the energy. So let's write down here a generic magnetic field B. let's also recall from basically your probably physics one lecture that the gradient of a certain quantity is always perpendicular to the iso surface of this quantity. So the gradient of the pressure field is perpendicular to the isobar of your system or the gradient of temperature is perpendicular to the isothermal surfaces and so on. So this vector will be perpendicular to isoenergy surface. Okay, so let's draw here our isoenergy surface, so let's assume that this is an ellipsoid. So what we have now is that the variation of k is perpendicular to the isoenergy, so it means that it's along the isoenergy surfaces. So our k vector can basically move only along this isoenergy surface. And this is also consistent with what we know from classical physics that essentially the the Lorentz force is incapable of making any work, so giving energy to a system, because the velocity is always perpendicular to the force resulting, so this gives zero power, zero energy. So it's not surprising that our k vector will move only along these isoenergy surfaces. But this motion of K must also be perpendicular to B. So K cannot move in every position of these isoenergy surfaces, but only on a cut perpendicular to B. So say the orbit of my electron in reciprocal space will eventually be essentially along this cut. Because this This is the only possibility that I have fulfilling all these different requirements. So let's now draw a cleaner picture of this. So before starting actually any calculation, we know the following. Let's consider this position in reciprocal space. assume that I have a magnetic field B like this and let's say without loss of generality we can assume that B it's essentially containing the kzky plane since the two longitudinal mass are the same in an ellipsoid if I rotate my framework, term of reference, along z, nothing happens. So I can make this simplifying hypothesis, simplify from the point of view of calculation, but the result will be correct. So we can say that the vector b actually has a... So here I did something weird. So let's keep it like this. So I use this is case is x, so this will be ky. So we express, we know that by is 0 in this case, because we chose it to simplify the permutation. And then we can express bz in this way. So we take this angle as theta. so theta will be the direction between the magnetic field and the longitudinal direction in our ellipsoid, and we express v as v0 cos theta, and vx will be instead v0 sin theta. theta, it's an angle between B and the longitudinal direction, which means the direction along which I have a longitudinal mass. If I consider one particular value of silicon it would be 1 0 0, if I'm considering one value in germanium it would be 1 0 0. Okay? So now I can essentially try to solve my differential equation here, which is essentially a set of three different, so this is a vectorial differential equation, so it will be three sets of, a set of three equations along each direction. So I will have that the derivative of h kx in time is equal to the electron charge and here if you work out let's say the dot product you will have dy cross product sorry dy vz minus vz by then i can write down the same equation in the y direction and i will have vz vx minus vx vz and I can do the same in the z direction and I will have the electron charge Vx Vy minus Vy Vx so this is the general expression I get and now essentially since I've chosen my frame of reference to simplify my problem you can see that all the terms containing Vy they are zero because Vy is zero in our frame of reference okay and so our set of equation simplifies and we can also now calculate the value of the v y v z and the x so we know that the energy dispersion is the following in our effective mass approximation. So if I calculate now the Vx component, for example, this would be 1 over h bar, and then I have the partial derivative just along kx of my energy. And this is going to be 1 over h2, h by h bar square kx divided by 2 mx. And so this is simply h kx divided by MX and this will be the same in all the other direction and also in this case this expression has a very clear semi-classical meaning so HKX is the momentum V divided by the mass the momentum in classical mechanic is MV divided by M so I get the velocity okay so essentially now I can take this expression here and replace the different V I've calculated in this way and I get this kind of system of equation Thank you. And the last one is the column. So as we discussed before we are expecting a solution where essentially k is changing in this plane. So our guess solution will be the following that kx, ky and kz they are essentially waves of this kind so I will have a coefficient which depends on the amplitude of my vector the initial condition so we'll have a B and C but they will all possess the same frequency omega. So let's see if it is a solution or not, of course it is, it will be. And if you, so make the proper derivation and you replace the derivative of K and the value of K in this expression here so you're now essentially transforming your differential system of equation in an algebraic problem so you will get essentially this I Omega a minus e B divided by my B Z equal to zero yeah I will have plus e a v z divided by mx plus e omega b minus e c m z v x equal to zero and the last equation will be zero plus EB BX divided by MY plus E omega Z equal to zero okay so the reason why I wrote this expression with this spacing is essentially because we will have matrix like this which multiplies my amplitude ABC of the motion in kx, ky, and kz. and this needs to be zero so essentially I can find Omega by setting the determinant of this matrix to zero. Okay? If you do this, so if you set this determinant to zero, you get this expression. Okay? And this is essentially a trivial solution which is omega equal to zero, which we are not interested in. And the other solution, if you work out the math, is essentially the following, that omega square needs to be equal to e square, 0 square times sin square theta of mx, ml, sorry, mz, and y and z plus cos square theta mx square. Okay? So now we cast this into, for example, one of the delta values of silicon. So we take Mz equal to Ml, the longitudinal effective mass, and Mx and My equal to the transverse mass. So eventually we get omega is equal to E V0 root square of sin square theta mt ml plus cos square theta mt square. So plus minus simply indicate the motion in the reciprocal space in the two direction but we are not interested. So let's try to visualize this solution in our reciprocal space using our ellipse solution. So let's consider two extreme cases. This is also a good method to remember the different weight of this expression. So one thing you first need to remember is that also in your electromagnetic study, the cyclotron resonance is defined in this way. So it's E, the electron charge, times B, divided by some mass. in a physics tool this was M0, now this becomes 1 over the cyclotron mass which is equal to this expression here so sin square MT ML plus cos square MT square okay so we are recovering the secretron frequency but now essentially we are changing the mass so let visualize this in a in a sepulchral space so I have my ellipsoid and we just before we say okay the magnetic field so the motion will be essentially is cross-cut and theta is this value here. And so let's consider the two extreme cases where theta is equal to zero and theta is equal to pi divided by two. So one case when theta is equal to zero, I essentially have the magnetic field in this direction. So I'm cutting my ellipsoid as a cigar, essentially, in this direction. So you see that here I would expect to have a circular orbit. And what happens when theta is equal to zero? You only have this there. So you are probing only the transverse mass. because all your orbit is determined by the transverse mass which is the square root of the transverse mass is related to this distance here. Okay, so you essentially are activating only this term, so it's clear that here below you should m only mt, you cannot have mn. Now, if I work instead at theta equal to pi divided by 2, the magnetic field will be in this direction, so I'm probing this other ellipsoid which contains this information, mt. OK, so now that we have this expression here for the synchrotron mass, we can understand better how this experiment works. So essentially, I have this value of one over mc, and I know that synchrotron frequency depends on E, B and this effective mass. As I told you before, the experiments are performed using the fixed value of omega. So omega is 14 something, 14.6 maybe, something like that. Gigahertz in the experiment I will show you. So omega is fixed. And what I do, I basically I scan the value of the magnetic field. So I crank on the power of my electromagnet and I move the electric field. When the value of electric field is such that I am in resonance with my omega frequency, my system will be resonant and will absorb this energy. So we see an absorption peak at this particular value of electric field P. So basically what I'm doing, I'm scanning B, omega is a constant, E is a constant, and from the values of B, when I get some absorption peak, I will obtain the value of the single cycle to a mass, MC. And so, if I know also the angle I'm using for these measurements, I can retrieve the first equation with MT and MTL. So in principle, I can take two values, let's say, of two different angles, and I will have two equations which allows me to retrieve MT and ML. So the simplest case is I can take the measurements at theta is zero, and I get MT, and then I make another one at ML, theta equal to pi divided by two, and you get this. Actually, you can learn much more. And this is actually the first set of data. So this is a paper from the 50s. In the author you have Kittel, the author of, I don't know if you ever used this book for long, so it's in physics. But essentially, so this is the configuration of our system. So here we have the cube of the crystal lattice of silicon and we have a mistake in this drawing from a book, because this is not the 1 minus 1 plane, it's a plane which is essentially something more like 1 1 0 or equivalent. So the 111 plane would be kind of containing some of the diagonal, diagonal of the cube, which is not this case. So this is a 100 plane. And essentially, in this experiment, what was done was taking a different absorption specter like this one. So this one is obtained at a fixed angle, so 30 degrees from the 100 axis, so this one, okay? And at a fixed frequency, so it is actually 24,000 mega cycle per second, so this would be 24 gigahertz in our today's unit measure. And what you see here is that you have a central peaks in this absorption and they are being regulated by the author like holes, electrons and holes. We'll see later how they do this. scientists actually understood that one was electron and one was hole. But let's see, let's first focus on electrons and let's try to understand why we see two peaks and not one or three or four or six. Essentially, as I told you, our cyclotron mass depends on the angle between the longitudinal direction and the direction of the magnetic field. So in a situation like this one, we have one angle theta, let's call it theta 1, which applies to the electron which are in these pockets, these two indicated in red. But then we also have another angle, it's called a theta2, which is the projection of the same magnetic field on the other delta valleys. Okay, and in this case, all the other delta valleys have the same projection because in this particular direction of the electric field, this angle is equal also to the one I would make with the other delta valley. So let's say I will have two valleys, these two in red, which will give me a value of 1 over mc, because teta is some value, and the other four will all give me the same projection, so the same value of 1 over mc. And so you see that one peak is actually stronger than the other. So it means that this one is actually the one related to the cyclotron resonance of this valley here, okay? And this one, which I indicated in red that these are our two valleys, is the one related to the valleys here, okay? And actually you can do this, let's say, here I did a bit of trigonometry, so you can take this 0, 0, 1 direction and calculate this angle, this angle theta is 40 degrees, and so if you put this in the formula we used before, you get so this one, you get that the cyclotron mass is actually 0.21, okay, and if you instead consider this ever ever angle which is 69.3 degrees you get a larger mass so in our case it means that we see this peak stronger magnetic field of course you can do this continuously so you can do for example like it was done here, measure the conductivity, the cyclotron mass, at different angles. So, place your sample, for example, your magnetic field in the 001 direction, and you measure the scan B, and you find the values of the effective about sequential mass, then you rotate a bit and you continue like this. So for example here at 0, 0, 1 we see two peaks. This is easy to interpret, it's the case we have seen before. So this one with a lower mass will correspond to essentially a situation like this one where I'm cutting the ellipsoid along shortly along this circumference here where this is proportional to the square root of mt but since I also have the other ellipsoids the same magnetic field will cut the isoenergy surfaces in this way and will give me a heavier mass which is a combination of it will be something like 1 ml mt and it is this point okay and then you see that there is a direction which is a one-on-one direction where essentially the projection of all the magnetic field in all the valleys is the same okay when I along this direction I will have a full degeneracy so this means that this bit will move around and they essentially so this one we go down this one we go up and they will meet at some point and then we see a single mass. And then they again separate. So in this way I get two, a few pieces of information. First of all, these lines here connecting the experimental points are essentially this expression here, okay. The angular dependence is this one. So our acceleration theorem in reciprocal space, which is a bit weird, it's semi-classical, our treatment of the system is a very simple differential equation. The effective mass approximation we need to get to the velocity simply as h bar k divided by m. All this is actually, these are all good approximations because I get a good fitting with my experimental data. So and this is one piece of information. Second thing I learned from this is that I can actually measure mt and ml and understand that in GIDA I have only these two masses so my experimental description is consistent with the ellipsoidal shape. And the third thing I get information about the degeneracy of the states, because essentially if you take any weird direction, let's say in the Cypriot space, you can you can have, for example, three different peaks which are related to the couple of masses. So you understand that in silicon you have a six for the genus. Okay. So you can do the same with the same paper, they did the same experiment on germanium. So this is again something more like 1 1 0 or equivalent. And here you see that you have actually the same orientation with magnetic field, you have three different peaks. and if you look at this picture it's more complicated to see not in three dimensions but essentially now you need to consider the different projection that this magnetic field has from this direction so this one projection the other direction will give me a different value of theta and then the two here will give me two degenerate other positions so this is why i see three peaks and these are my schematic attributes with this code color again the interesting thing is looking at the this plot the dependence of this secretor mass on the angular orientation between magnetic field and crystal. And so you see it's very different from silicon. So it means already tell you that the symmetry of the conduction band is different. And if we consider now the 1, 0, 0 case, let's draw, say, the cube representing our reciprocal space. And we know that essentially the valleys are in these pockets. okay and if I take the direction of the magnetic field which is this one all these pocket will be the same I will have the same projection I will measure the same mass let's consider what happened along the one one one direction so one one one direction will be the following and here I will have these two pockets giving some projection and the other remaining three give you another projection, and so you see that we have two bands which are the same and one which is different, and so on. So from these measurements you can learn a lot about the symmetry of your system. So we kind of forgot about the hole. And what happens with the hole is that the dispersion, the variation of the effective mass is much weaker than in the case of additon. So you see this plot here. You have a variation of a factor of three between this 0.12 or even more if you go here. OK, from here to here, it's a large variation. So it means that these absorption peaks, they move a lot in our spectrum. While for holes, this is less the case, so the dispersion is weaker. And we see that we have, say, two kinds of dispersion. So let's look at the left part of this plot, which is related to germanium. OK. So we see that we have a heavy particle and the light particle, one is the heavier band and the other one is the lighter band. And we also see that this light-torque band has essentially no dispersion, which means that our isoenergy surface is a sphere. Because if you have a sphere like this one, whatever direction you apply the magnetic field, you will get the same cut in the cyclic spaces of the same effective mass. So this indicates that essentially here we are cutting in any direction you might consider we always get the same behavior. So we have this no dispersion, this flat line. Instead, if I look at the effectiveness of the whole Elvi-Romance, I have a kind of a more complicated dispersion. But again, this can be reconciled with the fact that essentially I'm cutting now what is more or less a cube in different directions. So if I have, let's say, apply the magnetic field this way, I will get a mass like this one, so this will be the 1 0 0 direction. if I cut now along the 1, 1, 1 direction you see it's a maximum I'm essentially cutting this cube in this way so you see that the distance from the center of the premium zone to the border is larger so this means I will have somehow a larger effective mass and this is what I measured here Okay, so the left panel is the one of case of G-medium, the right one is the case of C-medium. You see that, as we stressed many times, the main features of the valence band are the same. So in both cases, we have a heavier and a lighter band at the top of the balance band with this dispersion characteristic. Okay? Okay. So, this is actually a good point to make a break, and we will continue. Okay. Okay, so let's try to point out where we are in our time scale of this lecture. So here, the beginning of the first lecture, there was a panel with bulk properties, with type binding, k.p, and so on. Now, this part is concluded. So now we would like to understand how to make a nanostructure. The key ingredients that we have in nanostructure are the following. So the first one is that I typically need to combine different semiconductors for several reasons. One is, for example, having a different band gap so that they can make a quantum wire, a quantum wire or a quantum dot. And the other one is actually, as I pointed out in our first lecture, we have tens of different semiconductors that I can work with. If you remember this plot with the band gap on the y-axis and the lattice parameter on the z-axis, so it's quite crowded with different materials. But I have only a few actually substrates which are mechanically stable and physically stable that I can work with. So another reason I would like to have an alloy is for example changing the lattice parameter of the substrate in such a way that I can implement another new silicon-battery material. So essentially the reason behind alloy is essentially having a new lattice constant or a new band gap and a new band gap in such a way that then I can, this will enable me to do quantum confined structure and also to apply strain or take into account strain. So let's first have a look at the formation of alloys in semiconductor and we will start by considering the kind of chemical stability of an alloy. So in a super simplified approach, we can say that when I put together two materials, let's say material A and material B, to form an AB alloy. So in material A the atom will have a certain binding energy here is called BA and in material B they will also have binding energy while when I put together A and B I will have a different binding energy So the first discrimination of what can happen comes from comparing this value, this delta energy, which is the difference between the energy I have, let's say, in the separate phase. and what I would get in the mixed phase. So this delta value can take different values, let's say. If we consider now just the back modulus of delta, and I say that essentially this is comparable to the thermal energy, it means that there is no particular driving force in forming an alloy or taking the two materials separately. So it means that the entropy will take over and eventually I will have a perfectly miscible alloy. So if there is little difference between the binding energy of a separated species and not the alloy, I would end up with a randomly distributed arrangement of atoms A and B in my alloy. form a perfectly random and perfectly miscible alloy. And this is the case, for example, of silicon gemini. You can mix them up and you will form a random alloy. The other possibility we have is that the modulus of delta is actually more than the thermal energy, but then it's a negative value. So it means that there is a stronger tendency of the atom to link one to the other. So this is, for example, the case of free files, because if I link a gallium atom with another gallium atom, I will have some kind of covalent bonding. But if I link the gallium atom with an arsenic atom, I will also have an ionic component. So in this case, it has a strong tendency of atom A to be surrounded by atom B. I will have what happens, for example, in free file, okay? Zinc blend structure with one atom in the central position, let's say, gallium, surrounded by four atoms of arsenic, and each atom of arsenic is surrounded by gallium and so on. The third case is that it's actually the opposite. say delta, it's larger than the thermal energy, but this time it's positive. So it means that there is a stronger tendency of at least one of the elements, if not both, to stay in a separated form. So this will be essentially forming not a single phase, but I can have, for example, some alloy and inclusion from a different material. the example we will make is for example germanium tin, silicon germanium tin, okay? So this, to make things a bit more quantitative, a tool we can use is essentially the phase diagram of a system where I have in the case of atomic of silicon germanium, so this is the atomic percentage of germanium, so this will be pure silicon, this is the PPO germanium and here we have temperature so this is the melting temperature of silicon this is the one of germanium if I take a random I take two crystals of silicon germanium I grind them put it in an oven and heat them up I will end up for example with an alloy which has a 60% atomic percentage of germanium. And when I cool down, at some point, when I enter this region, I will have essentially a solid phase, which contains 40% germanium, and a liquid phase which contains 75% of germanium. And when I cool down, and I enter again in this solidus region, I will again end up with my 60% silicon-gimenium alloy. So what I have, because this level will reduce, so we get less and less, more and more material in the solid phase, and less geminium in the liquid phase, and eventually I will end up with an alloy which is exactly what I put at the beginning. So if I had 50% atom of silicon and 50% of germanium, melt them, cool down, I get 50% alloy. A system which behaves like this is also the free files, meaning the temporary compound, because as I, in the previous slide, I was saying, okay, free file, they do belong to a different category. They are perfectly ordered alloys. So if I have just gallium and arsenic, I have this perfect ordering in my system. But if I have a thermal alloy, like indium gallium arsenide, where essentially this element comes from group three, and this element comes from group four, or group five, sorry. So we see that we are still, satisfying this rule that they have 50% of atom from group 3 and 50% of atom from group 4. But now I'm mixing the element from group 3. And so in the following we will imagine that this alloy is essentially formed by mixing indium arsenic with gallium arsenic. take indium arsenic and gallium arsenide, not just as an alloy, but as an element by itself, when you mix them up you will obtain a curve which is essentially identical to the one of silicon engineering. So ingas is also a perfectly miscible alloy. Well, arsenic will always stay in one position and it will be surrounded by indium or gallium depending on the, but in a completely random way. So we will use this idea of a random alloy also for mixing binary elements with the copper accretion. And the same works for quaternary elements. We can also add another element here, we can put antimonide, and this will be y1 minus and then we can have a similar behavior. So we can think this as a mixing of different elements. So this is instead, we go back to the case of really gallium arsenic, gallium arsenide. Okay. And so we see that the phase diagram in this case has a vertical line right in the middle, the middle, which means I can form my alloy only if I get exactly the right composition. So for example if I have a bit less of arsenic when I'm in this region here, I will have some gallium arsenide and a liquid which contains very little arsenic and a lot of gallium. And this is actually how gallium arsenide crystals are done. So at some point, you take out from your solution the solid part, and this would be exactly gallium arsenide. And the remaining part would be a liquid solution with a very little arsenic and a lot of . OK? One thing that is a difference between group 4, but also say silicon-germanium tin, this works in the same way. It's that this miscibility brings also some effect when I try to make a nanostructure. So what you see here is the comparison of two different superlimes. an alternating material with different composition. So on the right end we have this light part which is germanium and this black part which is some silicon germanium alloy. And on the bottom we have the same kind of structure done with gallium arsenide and aluminum arsenide. And what you can see here is that actually here we really have perfectly atomic sharp interfaces, because essentially let's say that I terminated my part here with an arsenic layer in gallium arsenide, then the next atomic plane can only be aluminum. So if I put arsenic it will not stick to a surface. So until this surface is completely covered with aluminum, I cannot put another arsenic. So you will have a really atomically sharp variation from one material to the other. Instead, in the case of silicon germanium, I can have an intermixing effect because basically this atom can take a position independently, I can always incorporate germanium or silicon. So what happens is that you have these buried interfaces with intermixing. So this is a big, let's say, difference between a a growing group 4 element, or I say miscible element, and 3-5 elements. And this comes essentially from this phase diagram characteristic of this material. So another case which has become interesting from also application point of view is the case of germanium tin and this falls in the last third category where actually the system tends to separate one from the other. So this is the diagram of germanium tin alloy and essentially what you see here is that if I take a 40 percent let's say a mixture of germanium and tin, I melt it completely, I cool it down. At some point here I would get essentially some germanium tin with a very small percentage of the other 1% tin content and a liquid with a lot of tin. When I go down to the solid phase, I will be here, and essentially I will have a Germanium tin with 1% tin, let's say, and pure tin in the beta phase, which is the hexagonal one. So what you get is essentially this kind of behavior, where you have this tin droplet, So this is hexagonal tin, which is completely separated by the gemenium tin below, which is only 1%. So these diagrams, and this is essentially a zoom in on the first part where we see, actually I was saying 1% is even less, so you can get a fraction of a percent of tin incorporated. And actually these are essentially equilibrium diagrams, so it's thermodynamic equilibrium, I take a melting pot of my material and I cool it down very slowly, so I always, I let the system, I give the system the energy and the time to go to its minimum energy configuration. But we will see actually in the future lectures that if you, for example, do an epitaxial grow far away from the equilibrium conditions, so for example at very low temperature, you can kind of obtain your system in a metal stable state. So nowadays people are able to grow Gevanium tin with 20% tin content. And if you remember the mass structure of this element, the motivation behind this is that you would obtain a material which is a very good infrared absorber because the the band becomes smaller and it's also a delicate material. But we will come back on this later. Okay. So we say that the... There are two motivations behind making alloys. One is engineering the energy gap and the other one is engineering the lattice parameters. First question we should ask ourselves is how does the lattice parameter changes when I make an unrolling? And the answer, 99% of the cases, or if they say with a very good approximation, is in a very simple way, in this linear behavior. Okay? So we have typically a linear variation of the lattice parameter of element A and element B simply in a linear fashion. And one reason I still don't know is because I've been working in this field for several years. This thing, this is called Begaard's law, even though it's just a linear relation. If you look, let's say, in the In some materials you have a small deviation. So for example, the plot here is a one for silicon and germanium. So if you take the lattice parameter of silicon and you measure it by, sorry, of germanium and you measure it by XRD and you do the same with silicon and you draw a line, you get this dashed line, which is indicated at Degas law. But actually, if you make x-RD measurements and you measure the lattice parameter, you have this other curve here, which has a tiny bowing, so it's not perfectly linear. So basically, you can fit this also with a quadratic term, but it's a very small deviation. So in most of the cases, this is not done. We just use a bigger curve. And as I told you before, we can treat as miscible alloys also 3,5-thermal compounds. So this plot here is a multifraction X of some material. Let's take aluminum-indium-phosphide, for example. And you see that this line joins essentially indium-phosphide and aluminum-phosphide. So I'm imagining that I'm actually, when I do the, I'm considering this alloy here, I'm considering this as the combination of aluminum phosphide with a certain content X plus indium phosphide with a certain content, 1-sexy. So if you take the two lattice parameters of p-lipposide and aluminum phosphide and draw a line, you basically get the lattice parameter of the alloy. And here we have several examples, but if you look at all of them, you see that you are kind of making this reasoning. So the technique is gallium indium antimonide. So you see that this line goes between indium antimonide and gallium antimonide. So the other motivation behind the, let's say, making alloys is actually engineering bandgap. So the other question is so the other question we should ask ourselves is essentially how does the bandgap changes when I mix one material with the other. So let's take a simple example. example I have silicon and I have calculated the energy dispersion silicon then I have Germanium and I have calculated the energy dispersion for and I want to now understand how this energy of silicon germanium is for a given contact. So the simplest thing we can do is use this virtual crystal approximation. Okay, so I mean if we take it really seriously this issue of alloys is actually a very demanding computational task because the calculation of band structure is super simplified by the fact that we use Bloch's theorem, because if we don't use Bloch's theorem, we don't have a periodic system calculation, the only way I can do it is basically making a very large cell and use a density function theory. And in principle, this is the case of a random alloy. So in a random alloy, I don't have to do this, because every cell is slightly different from the other. So in principle, let's say, a perfectly safe way of calculating it would be just making a lot of calculation with random distribution and see if we have a systematic behavior of the banding. In the virtual approximation approach, what we do is the following. We say that we have a periodic crystal, a perfect periodic crystal. But the atoms are not silicon, are not germanium, are virtual atoms which are made with an average properties of silicon and germanium. So I have virtual atoms with averaged properties. So if we use this idea and we plug it in tight binding approach, what does this mean? essentially means that in the tight binding approach the difference between one element and the other is essentially given by the different overlap integrals. So I have for example this E , then we have the B , the V and so on. So what I'm doing, I'm essentially taking the overlap integrals for one element and averaging it with the other. So let's say I want to calculate the band structure of silicon germanium. Okay, I take the ss orbital for silicon versus ss overlap integral, sorry, I take the one for the menu, and I run a new calculation with this average value. And in this way I calculate my pile structure. So this is something actually that we can do with our, for example, S, P3 S star calculation. So let me see. I'm just writing this. Okay. So, this is the code. Yes, what we have used to calculate the band plucker, so you remember everything is containing this TB file where we have defined the overlap integral with different elements, and then I have the g factor, and then I have the Hamiltonian to solve, okay? So if I run this, I'm calculating the mass of silicon, I'm computing only five bands, which are just enough to be able to take a conduction band, and I do this in two points in the reciprocal space. Then, so we can do the same for arsenic, gallium arsenide, aluminum arsenide, then we compare compared, for example, the evolution along group 4 of the band gap. We compare along the reciprocal space. Actually, this is where we already know that the defective mass is getting smaller as the band gap is smaller. And now we can calculate the backplot. Now we can go to virtual crystal. So what I did here, essentially in this code, I have added a part, we take semiconductor 1, semiconductor 2, some x value, and I create the new overlap integral simply as a linear composition of the two materials. So let's see what happens in the case of silicon-gumenium. We do this, we need silicon for this zero. This is a bad structure. Silicon is . Okay. Now I can add more germanium. I put percent. And you see that you have a small variation. Then I put 40%. you see that you start with the S minimum here, 60, 80, and eventually we get the full germanium, okay? And for example you can do the same with another alloy, which is is gallium arsenide, aluminum arsenide. So here, this will be aluminum gallium arsenide, because arsenic is the same, so I maintain gallium and arsenic. So again, in this case, I can go to the structure of gallium arsenide, which is a direct gas semiconductor. And if I have aluminum arsenide, we indirect gaps in the inductor fusion. Of course, as in the past, we needed a single band. So let's look at the conduction band. So this is the case of aluminum gallium arsenide. And we are increasing the aluminum content. you see that the band increases at some point the material around 40 percent so the material becomes direct and of course you can do the same with any alloy you want to consider okay So this is a case of the medium, which is the minimum of the minimum of salt, minimum is here. And as you go up, you have silicon where the minimum is in the delta value. Another thing we can do is actually looking at the evolution with composition of the different You see here that basically we have three main points in the conduction band that we want to look at, which are S, the gamma point, and L minimum, and in the case of silicon, delta. If I do the same for, if I do gallium arsenide and aluminum arsenide, the minimum is in the L position, let's say. So we can have a look at how this three different points, gamma, L, and delta, depending on the material, evolved with composition. So we can obtain like this one, where essentially we have as a function of arsenic, the aluminum content, how we energy these different parameters. So, pure value of the material, which would be this one. We have a variable material, because the minimum of the conduction band is in gamma. And as we add more and more aluminum at one point, the material becomes indirect. And so it becomes indirect in the end minima. And then we will have the minimum in the x-axis position. So we see that we have this evolution. We can do the same thing, for example, with silicon and germanium. Okay? Okay, and there you can see that we have a material which has a minimum in the delta valley, and this takes the same point a lot. Actually, this overlap integral was very well defined, and we had a better one in the interval in the previous, but essentially this pinch between delta minima and a minima, which here is essentially at 98 is actually put in place around here that's on 85 percent okay and then we have a nice gap between changes with the composition so we can see all the evolution also in this way so let's compare this with some experimental data Okay. So this is a case of aluminum arsenide. And so this is what we have seen before that we have this So this is algas from direct to indirect. So these are, this is our calculation, let's say. And these are essentially experimental data. And we see that actually we get a relatively good agreement. Here we have this crossing with the L-valley, which actually is not seen in experimental data. But again, as I told you, this is done with super simplified calculation. But we see that this x equal to 0.37 with 37% aluminum in your alloy, the material becomes indirect. Let's make another comparison. So this is the case of silicon germanium, the evolution we have already seen it, and this is the comparison of our calculation with experiment. As I told you, here I was using actually, I should recover the overlap integral in the MATLAB code and put it back, put it in the Python, but the general behavior is the same and we see essentially that we have this crossing around 85% of the germanium content where the which separates essentially this region here which we called let's say silicon-like behavior, meaning that the minima are in the delta valleys, from this part, where we have a germanium-like behavior, meaning that the minima are in the L valleys. Okay? Okay. And so let's have a look also at what happens to effective masses, how these effective masses evolve. So let me see if it's working here now. So essentially, sorry, this is again about the band cap. We'll come back to the refractive mass before. So this is the case of another alloy, indium gallium arsenide, so you see that's for the moment look just at the evolution of the band gap, so you see here on this, just look at this direction here, this left hand y-axis, so we have evolution of the gamma valley, of the L-valley into the X-valley in a mixture between gallium arsenide and indium arsenide. And a particularly relevant alloy is this one, with 53% indium and 47% gallium. So whenever you find written ingus without any kind of specification, it's kind of given that we are discussing about this composition here. Why we are discussing about this composition? this is exactly the composition giving an ingus alloy which is essentially this line here, lattice matched to indium phosphide which is one of the substrate which are industrially available. So when you read about about an ingas detector, and they don't tell you which is the content of indium and which is the content of gallium, it's essentially this alloy, this 53%, 47%, which is giving the lattice match, the lattice parameter of indium, this one. Okay? So we have seen a variation between the different gaps. Now let's have a closer look at this plot, which is again our chart with the lattice constant and bandgap energy. So here you see just three files and you see two kinds of lines, continuous line and dashed line. So continuous line indicates alloys where the material is direct. So ingas is one of such materials and the dashed line indicates a material where the band gap is indirect. So it's typically in the X position of the reciprocal space. So for example, value of arsenide and aluminum arsenide, you see they almost have the same lattice parameter. This is why it's such a well-studied and used a toripid taxi system, because you don't have problems in creating straight structures, they more or less have the same lattice parameter. But at some point, this line from continuous becomes dashed, which is this 40% that we have seen before, where we have a transition from direct to indirect. And the same is true, for example, for aluminum antimonide and gallium antimonide. But one thing we notice here from this plot is that there are some systems, namely gallium arsenide and gallium antimonide. So if I form a gallium arsenic antimonide alloy, for example, or indium arsenide, indium antimonide. so if i form an indium with some arsenic and antimonide well the dependence of the energy gap of composition has this boring effect So in particular, in the idiom and the monide arsenide system, we have alloys which have a band gap which is even lower than the one of the two elements making up the alloy. So for example, this point here, but also here we have this point. So first of all, we see that we don't have a linear variation. Actually that the curvature of this line is always pointing downwards. This is why it's called bowing. So if I put a string and I hang it, it will go always downward in the same way as this one. So what's the reason behind this bowing effect? Where is it coming from? So this is actually related to the fact that when I'm changing the band here, I'm also changing the lattice parameter of my material. So in my virtual crystal approximation, I imagine my system as essentially a perfect lattice made of these virtual atoms. But what happens in reality is that I will have a random distribution of, for example, indium and antimonide. So I will have region maybe where I have a bit more indium than average. Let's call it indium plus. And region where I have less indium. Let's call it indium minus. Sorry, I have to look at antimonide. Indium is always arsenic. Arsenic and antimonide. More arsenic or less arsenic. Okay? And so this means that this region will have a lattice parameter which is a bit smaller than the average value. and this one will have a lattice parameter which is a bit larger than the average. So I will have essentially strain coming in. So part of this will be, let's say, a piece of arsenic will be under tensile strain because the surrounding part has more arsenic and this part will be under compressive strain. But actually when I do it, when I When I measure something, like I have a photoluminescence experiment or an emission from a laser, I'm looking at the minimum bandgap in all my structures. So this part here, if it's under, let's say, the size train, I would typically have a lower bandgap. And in this part, I will have a larger bandgap. So landscape seen by the electron will be something like this, so pockets of positive and the larger and smaller bandgap. But if I make a photoluminescence, so for example I inject an electron, and the whole recombination then will take place in the part where I have the smaller bandgap. So I typically see, and it's more sensitive, let's say, to the region where I have the smaller bandgap. this micro scale uniformity of my alloy is actually at the origin of this bowing effect in this system. So you can see when you mix things with very different lattice parameters. Okay? Okay. So these are just a list of relations that you can use and you will find in exercises when needed, but all these differences of energy gap in the, let's say, free-type alloys are well known and studied because these are the materials used for making lasers. So some of them are well approximated by a linear relation, and some of them instead contain this dependence on the square of the content. And you see there is always a plus here, always a void, and vice versa. Actually, I'll show you later where you can find a lot of this data. Just a final word about effective mass. It is a super simplified view of the virtual crystal approximation. So we are mixing the overlap integrals and we have seen in our simple 1D chain that the value of gamma is proportional to the root, the inverse of the effective mass. So if I mix the vanishing dispersion of material A and material B, I will need to mix the vanishing So it means that in the Bifurcated Crystals approximation I should get to obtain the effective mass of the alloy of AB, I actually need to average the inverse of the masses and I will obtain the inverse of this. Actually this is a relatively bad approximation usually, so this is a comparison of some experimental data for indium arsenide and gallium arsenide, so these are the data points. And this is what we would get applying this rule. So in 90% of the publication in the book, here we have the prediction of virtual crystal approximation would be this one. What is actually used is simply a linear interpolation. of the two masses. So this typically works better than the other way around. Okay. A few words on diminutin. why we want to take this challenge of creating a material which doesn't exist in nature, because thermodynamics tells us that it doesn't want to go into germanium. The reason can be seen from this plot. So on the left hand, you have what happens in germanium. So the electrons are in the alpha-late, so I have a direct gap. So, for example, optical emission is very weak, so I cannot make a laser out of this material or an LED. But if I add tin, actually the calculation says you need 80 percent, at least, you get that the direct gap, the material becomes direct gap. So you have a gamma minimum here, and the bell curve becomes much weaker. So this is why a few groups in the world started to do it maybe 15 years ago, and try to trick nature and put more tin than what is actually allowed. And so, for example, this is a film of germanium tin with 8% tin on top of germanium. and you see that you have a very nice p-texin interface. And this is an XRV plot, basically telling you that these two materials have the same lattice parameters. So one problem is that if you have a germanium team which is not relaxed, that you actually need more than 80 percent, because compressive strain is counter- counteracting this mechanism of making it become a direct cap. But so people put more strain, more tin in it, so this is a plot of photoluminescence as a function of tin content, and actually if you go to nine percent or more you really get a direct cap material. And this is also seen for example in in essentially photoluminescence data, which are shown here. So this is a 5% alloy of tin. So this is the energy of emission. And we see that hidden behind this peak, there are two transitions actually. This one, it's the one coming from gamma. So it's a direct transition. And this one is the one coming from, no, sorry, it's the other way around. For 5% we have this one coming from the L electron and this one is coming from the gamma electron. So one is this one and one is this one. As you add more and more tin, you see that these peaks get closer and at the end you only one peak, which is the one of the direct gap transition. And so you see this was 10 years ago. So from photoluminescence, people tried to make a laser, and they succeeded actually actually this is work done at the unique classroom center in Germany. So it was an optically excited laser but essentially what you have here is the power of excitation. These are data at 4 Kelvin and you see that at some point you have a line coming out and you have a very sharp emission essentially. This was the first demonstration of a laser made with a material which is not 35 or 26 but only group 4, so an alloy of the immunity. Now this kind of laser they work at 300 Kelvin basically at room temperature. So the main selling point here is what? That essentially I can use a material which is a group 4. These layers are are grown using the equipment which is already available in a CMOS foundry. So in principle, if it is economically favorable, one could grow a laser on silicon without using any free-fired material compatible with silicon technology. Of course, in the plot I've shown you here, you've seen that the gap becomes direct, but it's also gets smaller. And so these are laser emitting in the mid-infrared. So the energy is here. So you see we have 0.5 degree, which is more than 2 microns. The challenges are what? That still means low nature are active. So I can do the growth at low temperature, 250, 300 degrees to avoid the segregation of tin, but then I cannot expose my sample to this temperature anymore. So any fiber, any step, for example, making contacts or reducing the defects in the material are forbidden, because as soon as I take my sample and I put it a few minutes above 300 degrees, I will have segregation of t, so all my work is spoiled. So it's doable, it's extremely challenging, but still it was an interesting work of science that said you take a material that doesn't exist in nature and make it less. Okay, so with this, it's enough for today, so we meet on Friday in the room. I've never seen the classroom. So, worries are always there, there's always something going on. Okay, so we'll meet there.