 So the exercise we are going to do now is actually this one. The only difference is that here we are having the same transistor, the first one is the same. The only difference is how we are going to disconnect the top gate and how we use the back gate to operate the very same transistor. So that's the difference. Which means that the top gate which is here will now be disconnected and they're going to operate from the back. Now the question is if we use the back-date voltage instead of the top gate voltage what's going to happen? How the transfer curve is going to move forward? In other words, what way should happen with the direct voltage? Will you transfer it to the beam? And we can do it again like the previous problem, two ways. We can either neglect quantum capacitance for use. So let's first neglect quantum capacitance. So if we neglect quantum capacitance, then the relationship to which we calculated the the previous problem of this one, the purity charge is equal to the gate capacitance times the u-r voltage. The difference is now that this expression is valid for the top gate, here the back gate, then you should modify it so that instead of the gate capacitance we have the back gate capacitance and also instead of the direct voltage with respect to the dock gate we have the direct voltage with respect to the back gate so you can write down the expression which is written there and so we have this one So it's the same as here, the only difference is we have the capacitance of the gate, which is now the back gate capacitance and the Dirac voltage with respect to the back gate. And if you now, because what we are looking for is this value here, if you now solve by the Dirac voltage with respect to the back gate, you will just get that this is top gate capacitance divided by the back gate capacitance multiplied by the Dirac voltage with respect to the top gate, and the Dirac voltage with respect to the top gate is given in the previous slide. It was obtained by measurements. You remember it was half a volt. Okay. So basically the only thing we have to do is to find the ratio of these two capacitances and the problem is done. And now you can easily see that this ratio is rather large because the back gate capacitance is much smaller than the top gate capacitance. And there are two reasons for this. if you look at the expression for the back gate oxide capacitance because in both cases the surface area is the same as the surface area of the channel so that means that A and A in both capacitances will cancel out and you just get the ratio of the oxide capacitances or insulator capacitances and now why this back gate capacitance is much smaller than the top gate You see the oxide capacitance is the epsilon divided by thickness and the first point is that here in case of the back gate capacitor we use the silicon dioxide. Why? Because I mentioned that's what we are going to use in this case because that's typically wafer used to deposit graphene. so we have silicon dioxide as the gate insulator and the epsilon of silicon dioxide you know is 3.9 something like this so it's smaller than the electric constant of this high K oxide we had at top which had if you go back to the previous slide which had K or the electric constant around 6 point something so it's not really okay this one is not really extremely high K okay 6.4 but still larger than that of the silicon dioxide so that's the first point and the second point is that the top gate is made with a very thin insulator in the previous slide it was written that the thickness of the top gate oxide is four nanometers and here it's written that the this back gate insulator is 300 nanometers so it's much much thicker so you have a smaller dielectric constant divided by larger thickness and of course you get a much smaller value if you put the numbers you will see that this capacitance is 122 times smaller than that of the top gate and then if you look at this expression it means that the direct voltage with respect to the back gate is going to be 122 times larger which means that and that's I think understandable if you have a capacitor with capacitance which is 122 times smaller then you need to apply voltage which is 122 times larger to get the same and that clearly shows you why you would like always to have a very large gate capacitance to be able to get the same charge distribution with a smaller voltage and here you see you are going to end up with very large voltages if you put the numbers if you remember this direct voltage was half a volt 122 times 0.5 is half of this which is 61 volts so you need to apply 61 volt on the back gate to reach the same state to reach the direct point so that's obviously not a good way to do it so that's the main disadvantage of this back gate you can of course argue but okay but that's mainly because this oxide is so thickness okay the electric constant is slightly smaller but that's mainly because this oxide is so thick cannot we just use the silicon wafer with also few nanometer silicon dioxide and the answer is yes you can use it but then you have two problems the first problem is if you remember you will not be able to see graphene on such wafer because the color of the wafer depends on the thickness of the oxide and you can see graphene only if the thickness is 90 or around 290 nanometers or 300 like in this case. So that's the first problem. But then you can argue, okay, but I don't care about this because now we use CVD-grown graphene, which I can place on the entire chip, so I don't need any information about visibility because I know the graphene covers the entire chip. Yes, that's true. But then you have another problem. The other problem is that, as I already drew you last time, this contact goes somewhere and they have to end up on some pads on which you land with the probes and if this huge pad which is like 200 by 200 micron piece of metal sits on a very thin insulator you have a very high probability of leakage of the leakage current. Of course also here you have a probability of leakage, but this surface area is much smaller so the probability is much smaller because oxides are never perfect you always have some sort of pin holes so you can get a rather large leakage current if you are unlucky and hit contact on top of the pin hole and that's why doing it in that way it's not really recommended. What you can do is and on top of all this what I told you last time this is a global gate which is the same gate for all transistors on the chip which is extremely bad. So the only thing you can do is for instance to make a local back gate and then place graphene on top, that would work. So you make a gate which looks like this but it's placed on the substrate and then you put graphene on top, that would work. That's one possibility for having a back gate but that would be a local back gate as this one is the local top gate. So that won't make much difference, okay. So anyway the problem is you cannot use the conventional back gate because it requires, I mean you can but it requires very large voltages and what about the case in which we include the quantum capacitance? Well if we include the quantum capacitance then we should go back again to the previous slide and if you go to the previous slide you will see that the relationship between this expression I wrote in the previous slide, relationship between the threshold voltage or the Dirac voltage and the impurity density is the density of the whole density obtained from impurities is given by this expression and because in the previous slide we already calculated how much is this density so this is this expression here okay now if you put numbers if you put numbers in this expression here for this half a volt Dirac voltage you will get that the first term is 0.21 volt and the second term is 0.29 volts of course the sum is half a volt that's what we had in the previous slide and now what's going to change if we have a back gate, if you have a back gate then of course this expression here now should be rewritten for a back gate so we have here the Dirac voltage with respect to the back gate, now you write this and you notice that here nothing changes the first term doesn't change this so called quantum term it doesn't change because of course the density of holes is the same, it's the same transistor, it's just different gate. So that means this term doesn't change and obviously it stays at 0.21 volt. So this doesn't change. The only thing we changes is of course the classical term in which you have the oxide capacitance, so in the classical term now you have here the back gate oxide capacitance and now because the back gate oxide capacitance is is 122 times smaller than this one, it means that this second term will be 122 times 0.29 volt, that's it. Or in other words, because these two terms are quite comparable, one is 21.21, another 0.29, you can simply neglect now the quantum term and simply take that this Dirac voltage is simply given by the classical term which is as I said 122 times 0.29 because as I already said this value which is now 35 volts is much larger than the first term which doesn't change so you can neglect the first term. The reason I deliberately here neglected the first term was to demonstrate something I told you before, you remember I told you if you don't want to have influence of the quantum capacitance which is connected in series to the gate capacitance, one way to do it is to have the gate capacitance which is extremely small because then this capacitance will dominate the series connection and you see that exactly happens here because this classical term is much larger than the quantum term. So in this case when you have this back gate basically quantum capacitance is completely relevant and but unfortunately this is bad because you have that you come you get this as a consequence of extremely poor of extremely low capacitance of the back gate. Anyway if you plot now this because this is now more realistic than what we got here because here we use realistic value for the carrier density, if you now plot the same plot as before, so if you plot the drain current as a function of the gate source voltage and put both in the same scale, the one in green, that is the drain current as a function of the top gate voltage, that is the curve from the previous plot. And now to that I added the same curve as a function of the back gate voltage, where we have the Dirac voltage out here which is this value of 35 volts so this is approximately here okay and now you see the huge difference between the two gates so here basically if you compare you need the insignificantly small gate source voltage to change the current and here to get the same change you need a huge range of the gate voltage so that's why you should never use of course this kind of the back gate and just to illustrate another example what you have here is a band structure shift I calculated before so now I repeated calculation what you have here this curve that's the what you have on slide I don't remember the number but that's one of the previous slides where I showed you how to calculate band structure shift as a function of the applied gate source voltage you remember so we commented then that if we apply like if you go like 1 millivolt away from the Dirac voltage then the band structure will move by 1 millielectron volt but if you go further more like if you apply like 1 volt the band structure will of course not go down because these are electrons not go up by 1 electron volt but by about 0.3 electron volt and now look if you repeat everything with the back gate so assume it's the back gate rather than the top gate in device then the curve looks like this you see so basically at one volt you have insignificant change of the band structure because capacitance is so so small so when you apply the same voltage the amount of charge induced in capacitor is so small that basically band structure doesn't have to move much down actually in this case up down is on this side so that means to get something like this you need to apply very very large voltage and that's for instance if you're interested in optics, in optical properties that's actually a problem why? because in some optical measurements you really would like to move the Fermi level that is to go away from the Dirac voltage with the Fermi level and the problem is that if you do optical measurements then you cannot use the top gate because when you shine the laser light, the top gate will block the light, so the light will not come to graphene. So you have to remove the top gate and use just the back gate, but then if you use the back gate, you have this problem that you have to apply very large voltage to be able to shift the DRAC, to shift the Fermi level and basically in that band structure, right? And in that case would be much advisable then to use the local back gate than the global baguette. Okay? Fine. So, that's pretty much it regarding the transfer characteristics of graphene at negligibly small VDS. But before we start with VDS, which is not negligibly small, I'd like just to comment on MOSFET because there was also a question someone asked me about MOSFET a long time ago. And I'd like to put now this all what we've done in the context of a MOSFET that you know from electronics or solid-state physics, so to be able to compare the two, to understand the difference between two transistors. So now what we have here is what I already showed you, so this is the transfer characteristic of a GFET, at negligibly small drain source voltage. We have the Dirac voltage, which is somewhere here, and now the question is, how does this compare to the MOSFET? If you use a conventional MOSFET, how is it going to look like? Is it going to be the same, similar? What's going to happen? So in case of the MOSFET, okay, I made here the schematic of a MOSFET. Of course, the MOSFET you see on this picture is the conventional one you have in the textbooks, but the explanation I'm going to give you is valid also for thin FETs or nano-sheet FETs. It's the same principle. So, you see in a conventional MOSFET we have a channel below the gate connected to source and drain, so from that point of view everything looks the same, so it doesn't look much different and then in order to bias MOSFET you can look at this picture or you can look here, what we need to do is to apply a voltage between gate and source and then to get the current we need some voltage between drain and source, conveniently source is grounded, that's not really necessary and basically with the gate source voltage we are going to control the carriers in the channel and the drain source voltage applied will give us certain current through the channel. So that seems pretty much the same but there is one big difference. If you look at the MOSFET you will notice that although, so this is n-type MOSFET, although the source and drain red, these red areas are made, well it's not written but because this is n-type MOSFET, source and drain are made of n plus type of material. So that means we have a strong electron doping here in source and drain. So source and drain are n-type, okay. So you notice that there is one big difference and the difference is that there is a sort inhomogeneity in MOSFET that the source and drain are made of the opposite material than the rest of the body so the rest of the body including the channel which is supposed to be here below the gate is the actually the different type we have a p-type here and we have n-type here and n-type here so we have a gate this blue is the insulator gate insulator here is the channel which is the p-type material and then comes the question why, why p-type, why didn't, why don't we simply make everything out of n-type material just to have a, like in case of graphene, continuous conductor from source to drain in which we control carriers by the gate voltage, why did we put this p-type body here? Well the problem is in theory you can do this, you can make MOSFET with n-type everywhere, The only problem is that then you will have a problem to turn it off because the main purpose of transistor, okay, that's not the main purpose, but in digital electronics you need to be able to turn off transistor. If everything is made of n-type, in the absence of the gate source voltage, you have a n-type conductor between source and drain. So that means with the zero gate source voltage, you apply some positive drain source voltage, you get the current between source and drain. the current flows actually electrons of course flow from source to drain but the electric current goes in the opposite direction from drain to source so that means if I would like to turn off this transistor I have to apply negative voltage to get rid of the electrons in the channel which means that you will have a problem you will have a problem that to turn off transistor you need a negative gate voltage but you operate transistor with a positive drain voltage and that's a mismatch you have a mismatch between the input voltage transistor which is the gate source voltage and the output voltage which is the drain source. I mean such FETs exist. You have so-called depletion mode FETs but they are not really very useful because you can't make digital circuits with them. Why? Because in digital electronics the main prerequisite is that one logic gate can drive another one so you can connect logic gates one after the other but if the input voltage of one logic gate is negative then it cannot be driven by the output voltage of the previous stage because the previous stage will have the output voltage which is drain source voltage positive and the next one requires negative to be turned off that's impossible you have a mismatch between the voltages so that you cannot connect them one after the other you can't make digital circuits in that way and for that reason this kind of FET is used which is called enhancement mode. So here we have a p-type in between which means in the absence of the gate source voltage so that is when the gate source voltage is zero there is no current flowing in this device, the device is in the off state, why? Well to explain this you should look how this p-type body is connected. Typically p-type body is not typically, p-type body is always connected to the lowest potential in the circuit which in case of the n-type MOSFET is basically the source potential so that's why typically you have a p-type body connected to the source so they're connected together to drain and that's why I prefer to use this symbol because there is another symbol for MOSFET in which we have the four contact which is the p-type body but this is always connected to the source so that's why forget it just use this symbol for the type mosfet okay and now look what's going on here here between source and drain you have two p-n junctions back-to-back here is n here is p and here is p and here is n okay so basically you have a diode oriented back-to-back so there is no way you can get current through this device because even if you buy a device so that one diode is in forward, another one will be in reverse regime, so it will block the current, you have two diodes back to back and not only that, if you look closely at the circuit you will see that actually those diodes have no current, why? Because the one on the right hand side, the diode next to the drain, it has the drain as the n-type but the drain is always at a higher potential than ground, than the p-type body so you have an n-type of the higher potential than the p-type so you have here the diode which is reversely biased so there is no current the diode on the left is not reversely biased because source and p-type body are the same potential but you have a diode which is short circuited so the current is zero again so not only those two diodes are back to back but also they have no current so that means when the gate source voltage is zero this device is off and now you will need a positive voltage to turn it on so that means the operating regime of this enhancement MOSFET will be from zero to some positive voltage exactly the same range you have for the drain source voltage and that's why this enhancement mode MOSFET can be used in digital electronics because the input and output voltage have the same polarity you can cascade them together and make more complex circuits out of the logic gates okay fine but let's see how does this work now okay so we start from this at Vgs equals zero which is this point here we know there is no current so the current is here the device is in the off state and now what happens when we apply a positive gate source voltage what happens is the same as with GFET when you apply a positive gate source voltage the band structure in the channel goes down the same as in GFET there is absolutely no difference which means when you apply a positive gate source voltage why this situation is the same because you still get you have again here the MOS capacitor right you have a metal insulator semiconductor you have the capacitor you apply the positive voltage that means that you get between gate and source which means that here you get positive charge and here you should get negative charge the same as with GFET which means that the band structure in the channel must go down, but there is one big difference. The big difference is the band structure is totally different, because this is made of proper semiconductor, which is for instance silicon, and you have actually the band structure which looks like this. So you have a band gap. You have the conduction band above here, you have the valence band below this level here, and the Fermi level, because this is a p-type material, which is usually poorly doped, the Fermi level is somewhere in the band gap but closer to the valence band than to the conduction band so something approximately which looks like this and then when you apply a positive gate source voltage you see the band structure goes down as the band structure goes down the Fermi level gets more further and further away from the top of the valence band because the top of the valence band moves down which means we are depleting the channel of holes exactly the same what we had with graphene the band structure goes down and the number of holes in the channel goes down you remember so we had the for instance in GFET we had six holes initially then we apply some positive voltage we induce three electrons in the valence band and we get three electrons cancel out three holes and we end up with three holes, we get fewer holes in the channel. Exactly the same is happening here, although in this case this change is becoming more visible in the sense that this area gets depleted of holes. The same happens in GFET of course, we deplete channel from the holes but the consequence of depletion of this semiconductor that you are getting uncompensated ionized impurities, right, acceptors. The same happens in graphene. The only difference in graphene, I never draw those impurities because they were outside of the channel, because those impurities were sitting on top of the channel and here those impurities are actually inside the channel, that's the only difference, not everything else is the same. So basically as you keep increasing the gate source voltage, the holes go from here through the generator to the gate or let's be more let's be more precise the electrons go from gate metal through the generator into the channel and start cancelling out holes so basically this gate is getting more and more positively charged and here we are pumping negative charge so we are depleting the holes but in contrast to graphene for all this time the current still stays zero because we have no possibility to establish conduction between source and drain we are depleting the holes here but holes cannot contribute to the transport simply whether they are depleted or not simply because we have two p-n junctions back to back so as long you have any holes here there is no conduction in case of GFET and the band structure goes down we are depleting the we are depleting the holes and the current goes down because the holes contribute to the transport but since we are depleting the holes the current goes down in case of this FET nothing happens the current stays at zero so So whether you have a lots of holes at the beginning or fewer holes during depletion and nothing is going to happen because of these two p-n junctions. At some point when you reach the, in case of graphene, when you reach the Dirac voltage or in case of MOSFET when you reach so-called threshold voltage, you finally depleted basically all holes. channel is totally empty, the channel is totally empty, still there is no current. So you have to keep increasing further the gate source voltage to finally get some current and how this happens? Well if you shift this band structure down enough, the bottom of the conduction band will finally approach the Fermi level and at any finite temperature they will give you some number of electrons here. so basically what happens is so called channel inversion finally the band structure went down so much that the Fermi level came close to the bottom of the conduction band and we get finally some electrons in the conduction band and now we finally inverted the channel we get electrons in the channel at that moment when the conduction band went down so much that it reached the Fermi level and we inverted the channel we can finally get some conduction, so that point is called the threshold voltage in a MOSFET. When this is going to happen, well that depends on the density of states, depends on the Fermi Dirac distribution, that is depends on the temperature, the higher the temperature the sooner will happen because then you don't need to go very close to the conduction band at zero Kelvin it basically means the conduction band bottom has to hit Fermi level to be able to get some carriers some electrons in the channel okay. Well anyway it's going to happen at some point and now with the further with a further increase of the gate source voltage finally the conduction band is getting closer and closer to the Fermi level we are getting more and more electrons in the channel and finally current increases so that's how you get the transfer curve of a MOSFET okay and you see basically the principle is the same the only difference is that because of the band gap there is no current here that's it because of the way how the MOSFET is made and because of the band gap there is no current here but now you may argue okay so basically this corresponds to this yes that's absolutely true the only difference is that this is zero and here is not zero because here even when the Fermi level is at the zero point we have carriers in the channel not only thermal fluctuations but also the fact that we have electron hole puddles so the GFET can't be turned off but now the question is okay but does it mean that if I go now with the negative VGS at some point the current will start increasing in this direction why because if you now apply negative VGS then the band structure instead of going down is going up which means that the fermi of the which means at the top of the valence band is coming closer and closer to the Fermi level we are getting more and more holes in the channel and we should in theory get whole channel conduction the answer is no because we have two diodes back-to-back so as long as you have p-type carriers here as originally there is no conduction basically you can finally get conduction on this side if you apply voltage so large like drain source voltage to break down the diode which is in one of the two diodes which is in reverse so if you induce the diode breakdown you can get current but then you will destroy the MOSFET so basically it means that with the n-type FET you only get this part of the curve you cannot get the p-type conduction and that means if you would like to get a p-type conduction in a MOSFET you need the p-type FET you need the which is totally opposite from this one, which means everything is the other way around, which means you have a highly doped p-type source and drain, the body is now n-type and now because you have everything in reverse, all voltages must be in reverse, which means while the n-type enhancement FET is operated for positive Vgs, p-type enhancement FET is operated with positive Vsg not Vgs and the same for the output voltage for the n-type FET you need positive Vds for the p-type you need positive Vsd and that's why typically in electronic circuits p-type FETs are drawn upside down with respect to the n-type because typically electronic circuits devices are drawn in a way that current always flows from top to the bottom because at the top you typically have supply at the bottom is either ground or negative supply depending on the circuit like in op-amp you have plus minus with the ground in the middle and because the current flows from top to the bottom you have to rotate by 180 degree p-type transistor to get current flow from top to the bottom and that's why a p-type transistor where this is source because the error always indicates the source you have a VSD which is positive and VSG which is positive and in a p-type FET because it is VSG which is positive if you plot it on a VGS axis then the transfer curve looks like this of course if you plot it on a VSG axis then it looks like this for p-type if you plot on the VSG axis in some books the threshold voltage of the p-type transistor is also denoted by Vth but then Vth must be negative so then here you have a minus Vth I don't like this I would like just to use Vth as the positive value so when you plot you get Vth here which is always positive but I'm warning you in some electronics books you will find that they define Vth as negative because they would like to work with Vgs and then you need a negative threshold if it's Vgs but I don't like because this is just confusing just remember it is Vsg and VSD and everything else is the same you use exactly the same equation for instance this is the equation for the n-type MOSFET so use the same equation just swap all voltages so it's ID equal B times VSG minus something which is positive in the books you will find minus Vth absolute value which is really stupid so just assume Vth is positive and just do it like this anyway so now you see so what you have here this gap between positive and negative conduction that's actually consequence of the band gap because if you have a p-type FET the situation looks like this and now you have to move band structure up to get p-type conduction so that means this gap that you see between the thresholds of the positive and negative of the p and n-type fat that basically comes from the that comes from the band gap and that means if you would have no band gap then these two voltages will coincide and you we will get similar curve to that of graphene, okay. The only of course difference is that in enhancement mode FET you have initially opposite channel from source and drain, so even in that case of zero Vgs or Vsg you have no conduction, in GFET you have it, okay. Fine, I hope this is clear. So now you can put in perspective the MOSFET and GFET. Okay and now it's time to finally discuss what I told you and that's the transfer curve of a GFET when the VDS is not negligibly small. So this is now the proper transfer curve of our GFET because so far we just investigated case when VDS was negligibly small. Now it's time to look what happens when the VDS is finite. Okay so let's go. First to recap what we originally had was drawn here at this slide. So what I put here on the right hand side there's the transfer curve of GFET when the VDS is negligibly small. So this is the one I showed you before, the transfer curve and when the Vds is negligibly small you remember this minimum was at the Dirac voltage which I denoted by Vth and then also you remember in the absence of the gate and drain source voltage the only carriers in the channel we had were those of impurities so we had those six holes you remember and that was the surface charge density which is the C ox times the Dirac voltage which is this value here and that's what we originally had when voltages were not applied on the transistor and basically what we have to do now is to see what happens when we change Vgs from zero to some value but the only difference now is that Vds is not negligibly small and if Vds is not negligibly small it means that there is a difference between the drain and source potential so now we have a source which is this potential here, conveniently zero, it doesn't matter, while the drain is at some potential Vd which is larger than this source potential. So this is the source potential and this is the drain potential and the difference of course is the drain source voltage. Now this positive drain source voltage is not any more negligibly small. We cannot anymore more assume that this potential Vd is the same as Vs so we have to figure out now what's going on and now you can already understand if Vd is not the same as Vs then okay we can say what's the potential here because this potential is the source potential that's potential of this source metal contact why because metal is equipotential and of course I know the potential here is Vd because there's a drain potential that's drain metal which is equipotential but now the problem is on the left hand side of the channel I have Vs on the right hand side of the channel I have Vd what's in between uh-huh what's in between because when Vd is equal Vs is easy everything is in the same potential but now it's not so what are we going to do now now what's inside that's actually not simple to say because that's actually extremely tough problem in physics which is based on non-equilibrium self-consistent procedure if you really want to do it exactly why? because how do we in physics how do we calculate potential distribution in the system what do you need to calculate potential distribution in a system and what formula do you use? yes you use Poisson equation but Poisson equation requires to know the charge distribution okay fine charge distribution but how do I get charge distribution here I know it now but if I apply VDS is not going to be the same so what happens then how do I find charge distribution you find charge distribution how in quantum physics from the wave function because the magnitude square of the wave function will give you the probability of finding carrier at certain place which means the charge density should be calculating from the wave function but wave function is calculated from where from Schrodinger equation but what do I need from for Schrodinger equation to solve potential distribution so we have a very complex problem basically I can show you this very simple here so that means this as some of you said to find potential I need charge and I get it through the Poisson equation right but I need potential to solve Schrodinger equation to get charge so it's a kind of chicken-egg situation of course if these equations would be simple you can simply solve them you have system two by two two right you have system two by two Q and V if these equations are simple you can simply solve them imagine two linear equations with two unknowns you can very simple solve them by elimination unfortunately these are very complex differential equations and they can solve in the most general case they can be solved by elimination so it's a very very tough problem so what you do is basically this you assume certain charge you solve Poisson equation you get potential then you based on this potential calculate charge using Schrodinger equation and then you look whether this charge is the same as what you assumed initially typically this is not the case so then you take this charge and repeat the procedure you understand and then you go through Poisson find potential from Schrodinger get charge did you get the same no keep doing it keep doing it keep doing it until this process converges and you end up here with the same charge you had at the beginning then you finally sold it so that's all called self-consistent procedure it's extremely tough problem especially in non equilibrium when you have a drain source with the electric current that's really really tough thing to solve and of course I'm not going to do it there is no point to do it so what am I going to do I am going to assume the simplest possible charge distribution which means that what I'm going to do now is going to be qualitatively correct but quantitatively incorrect which means I will be able to explain processes but don't be picky about the numbers because we are never going to get exact numbers as I'm going to show you later okay fine but okay but what I should put here now what kind of potential distribution inside in the channel you're going to assume that's going to depend on the type of the transport so for instance if this were ballistic case what would be the potential distribution okay think during the break so what's the potential difference so what's the channel potential so what's the potential difference? so what would be the potential difference if this were a ballistic device? what ballistic means? It means the carriers travel ballistically from source to drain, but what does it mean ballistically? It means there is no scattering, right? And if there is no scattering, how much is carrier mobility? So, that means conductivity is infinite or resistivity is zero, which means that channel resistance is zero. So, if you have a resistor with a zero resistance and current flows through, there is no voltage drop, which means that in case of a ballistic transport, potential difference will be something like this. Source, channel, drain. There is no voltage drop across the channel and the only voltage drop you have are the edges here where the carriers get thermalized in big reservoirs which are the metal contacts of source and drain. So that would be the potential difference in ballistic case, which would correspond to infinite carrier mobility. However, the high carrier mobility of graphene is, it's never infinitely large. So that means in case of graphene, even though carrier mobility is very large, it's not infinite. So it's going to be close to this, but not really exactly. However, that's only in graphene which we have extremely high mobility. In more realistic devices the mobility is not really that, I mean it's high but not really extremely high and the consequence is that these devices are better described by diffusing model in which there is scattering of course because mobility is finite and because the mobility is finite the resistance is not zero and that means there is a potential drop across the channel and in that case we have some sort of potential drop going from source to drain, so which means we have to somehow connect these two by a continuous function rather than this step function which corresponds to the ballistic transport. Which function? Well, again that would require solving the self-consistent problem and since I'm not going to do it, I'm going to use the simplest possible approximation which is so called gradual approximation which is valid for regular resistors. So, if you have a regular resistor which is homogeneous, you know then that potential drop as you across the resistor is simply linear function because in a homogeneous resistor you have a constant electric field and the constant electric field gives you the linear potential distribution and for that reason I'm going to assume simply that potential distribution in the channel is just a linear function it's like this. So, here is in the source Vs, here is the drain Vd and in between I just have a straight line which connects VS and VD, like in any other regular resistor. And that's going to be the case for any resistor, however large is the carrier mobility in it, unless it's infinitely large, then it's a straight line, horizontal line, but otherwise it's always going to be like this. And that gives you the answer to the question, actually to what I commented before, that But with this we are going to get a rather good qualitative model to explain behavior, but quantitatively we are going to miss, so we are not going to be able to get really numbers absolutely correctly from this model because of this approximation, but it's rather good to understand the operation of the device. So that's it, that's the potential distribution in the channel and if you would like to have a formula for this line for instance to simplify further derivations you can very easily do it because this is just a straight line with a slope equal to VDS divided by L so the channel potential so V channel of X the channel potential is simply Vs source potential plus X times the slope which is VDS over L so that That means if you look when x is 0, potential is S, correct? When x is L on the other side, potential is Vs plus Vds. Vs plus Vds is Vd, because Vds is Vd minus Vs. So that's it, now we know potential. And now comes the main problem. Voltage on the gate capacitor. Because the voltage on the gate capacitor, which is Vg channel, is gate potential, which is fixed, that's fixed by the gate metal and the generator connected there. So the voltage on the gate capacitor at certain point x should be always Vg channel, right? VG channel is by definition VG minus V channel. VG is the constant voltage of the gate, V channel is the channel potential and now you see the problem. We have a very strange capacitor in which voltage, actually the potential of one plate is not constant. As we go from source to drain, potential of the bottom plate which is the channel actually goes up. So, in contrast to case in which Vds is negligibly small, in which channel is equipotential and it's Adisource potential and therefore the voltage on the gate capacitor, the voltage between the gate and channel is simply Vg minus Vs which is Vgs is this. Now we have a different situation in which as we go from left to the right, potential of the bottom plate goes up and which means that the voltage on the gate capacitor goes down because voltage on the gate capacitor is the constant gate potential minus the channel potential which increases as we go to the right and because of this minus it means that the VG channel decreases as we go to the right. So they have a capacitor with a very strange voltage. Capacitor on which the voltage is not constant but it decreases as we go from source to drain and this is now the voltage on the gate capacitor as a function of x. On the left-hand side of the capacitor the situation is the same as before because the left-hand side of the channel is always a disorbed potential, so whatever the Vds is, the left-hand side is always a disorbed potential, which means that here we have the voltage on the gate capacitor, which is the Vg minus channel potential, which is simply Vgs. So, the left-hand side there is no difference, the situation is the same. But as we go to the right, the voltage does not stay constant, but because this channel potential goes up, this goes down and finally so we have a linear function of course if this is linear this one is also going to be linear and finally the voltage on the right hand side is going to be what is going to be vg minus vd which is vgd of course this is the voltage on the right hand side is the voltage which is the potential of the gate minus potential of the drain because the right hand side of the channel is the drain potential. This Vgd is from the voltage key of slow Vgd is Vgs plus Vsd which means Vgs minus Vds and that's obviously because Vds is positive it's smaller than Vgs which is for instance this value here. This part which is missing that's VDS, that's how much is reduced down. If you as I said already would like to have the equation now for this, that's very simple you can easily derive it, you say the equation for this is what? This is VG minus V channel and the V channel is this, so it is VG minus this, VG minus VS is VGS and then minus X over L VDS, you get this expression. So as I told you when X is zero we have Vgs, as X increases this voltage on capacitor goes down we have a minus here and then finally in the right hand side the voltage is Vgs minus Vds which is Vgd. So it's this much and this here is Vds okay and what that means now for a charge distribution in the channel? What that means for the charge distribution in the channel? So as we go from left to the right, the voltage on the capacitor goes down, which means that the charge induced by the capacitor goes down, which means that this charge distribution is not going to be constant anymore, that's it. So that's what complicates situation. Okay, so since we are going to plot what's happening when we increase Vgs from 0 to, because I would like to draw the transfer characteristics starting from Vgs 0 to some positive value. Let's first consider this situation when the Vgs is 0. When the Vgs is 0, how does this plot look like? It looks like this. Vgs is zero, so at this point at the origin, when Vgs is zero, this point is at zero, because this is zero, we just go down up to minus Vds, you can easily see this, I mean that's the advantage of having linear potential distribution, because then you just have to understand what's happening next to the source, next to the drain, and in between you have a straight line, that's it, that's the easiest way if you ever get confused. so next to the source when the VGS is zero voltage between the gate and the channel is VGS and the VGS is zero so is this point here and here when the VGS is equal to zero VGD is minus VDS with this value here so for VGS equals zero we have this curve here. Originally in the absence of VDS what did we have for VGS0? We had this straight line here okay so this was for VDS0 when we had a discharge distribution but now we have this because VDS is not zero and now let's plot the charge distribution. When both VGS and VDS is zero we have this situation here what we had originally which is redrawn here but now look voltage between the so the only holes we have in the channel of those which comes from ambient impurities so that was the case when the VDS was zero which was this case but now look case when the VDS is not zero this is not a potential distribution as we go to the right voltage on the capacitor goes down is becoming more and more negative which means we're inducing more and more positive charges on the channel. So that means as this voltage on the capacitor goes down the charge actually goes up because the more negative voltage on the VGS means the gate is becoming more negative and the channel is becoming more positive so that's why this voltage on the capacitor which goes to negative induces positive charge in the channel and this is now the charge distribution in this case when the Vgs is equal 0 and Vds is some positive value. We have because of this initial potential drop here we have some extra charges here so these extra charges this triangle here you get that comes from positive applied VGS. Okay and now because we are going to plot what happens when the VGS increases from zero and goes to some positive value, what's going to happen to this plot? Because this point here is VGS, when we increase VGS this point goes up. How does this curve goes up? How does this curve go up? It just parallelly translates up. Its slope does not change. Why? Because the slope of this curve is defined by the slope of the channel potential. Because Because the transfer curve is plotted for a fixed VDS, in my derivation here, I'm going to assume that VDS is this much and it never changes, because the transfer curve ID as a function of VGS is always plotted for a fixed VDS. So if you fixed VDS, you basically fixed this slope here, this slope doesn't change and And because of that, this slope, these slopes here also never change, which means if we start from Vgs equals zero, if we start from origin and this is the voltage on the capacitor, it means that now it stands like this. When you increase Vgs, it simply translates parallelly up. So it goes up like this, okay? Because the slope doesn't change, the slope is defined by Vds which is fixed. And that means that this charge which is induced by the gate capacitor also translates down like this. If you don't believe me this about the charge you can actually derive it very easily. So let's derive mathematically expression for this line here and then you will see that really doesn't change the slope, the slope is just defined by VDS. So how to mathematically translate this? The reason I'm going to derive this is because this is not your own standard capacitor in which voltage is constant across the capacitor. Here the voltage is not constant and because of that you cannot tell anything about the state of the capacitor in global, you have to look locally for a fixed X. So you see what you see here is the part of the MOS capacitor, so you have gate, this is yellow, then we have insulator, this is this blue and then here at the bottom, at the x-axis we have the channel. We are looking at the state in the channel at coordinate x, so from x to x plus dx. Because dx is infinitesimally small, I can assume that I have a constant x here, which means that on this infinitesimally small capacitor, which has a length dx, the voltage is fixed and is given by the voltage between the gate and the channel at that given x. So, how do I calculate how much charge there is in this infinitesimally small capacitor at position x. Well, this is a capacitance equation, right? So, you say that the charge in this infinitesimally small capacitor, which is dqg, is epsilon of the insulator times the surface area of the capacitor. What's the surface area of the capacitor? This is this surface area here, this dimension here, that's the width of the channel or of the capacitor, so this is W times length is dx. So this dA that you see here, surface area, that's W dx, okay? And then divided by the electric constant of the capacitor times the voltage on the capacitor, which is here the voltage between the gate and the channel at So, that's the expression for dqg and now we are looking for the expression for the surface charge density at a given position. So, the surface charge density at any given position is the original surface charge density in the absence of the bias. So the surface charge density which comes from ambient impurities which is sigma imp, if you remember I showed you before that sigma imp this value here is C ox times Vth and we assume homogeneous distribution so this value is in all points. So it's sigma imp minus charge density induced by the gate. So this is sigma imp minus and sigma sigma G is the surface charge density which corresponds to this charge dQG which is dQG divided by the surface area which is dA so minus dQG divided by dA dQG divided by dA is C ox times VG channel so you get this is C ox Vth minus C ox VG channel you get C ox Vth minus Vg channel, right? and now you finally put expression for Vg channel which is this one so you get C ox times Vth minus Vgs plus x over L Vds, that's it. What you have here that's the equation for this line here. Okay? And you see, what do you see? You see that when the VGS increases because of the minus sign here, surface charge density goes down. But the slope of the surface charge density, slope of this curve, is Cx times VGS over L. It does not depend on VGS. So that's what I told you. if you fix this slope you fix this one and therefore the charge here so in this particular case you have on this image here this is the case when the VGS is equal to zero which is this voltage on the gate capacitor right and when the VGS is zero you can get rid of this VGS and you get equation of this line is C ox Vth plus X over L Vds which is written here but this is only for this line here when the Vgs is zero and now what so we have a voltage on the gate capacitor like this so as you go from source to drain it's getting negative which means the charge on the capacitor is getting positive okay and now when the Vgs goes down the voltage between the gate the voltage between the voltage on the gate capacitor goes up so it becomes more positive and the charge then is becoming more negative that is you are depleting the holes which you can see from this expression because we have minus Vgs. Okay, I hope this is clear right? Which means that if you now plot the current at this point here when the Vgs is equal to zero we have certain current for a given Vds and this current is how much with respect to the current we had in the absence of this VDS. Now of course in order to compare what we are going to get now with this transfer curve here I'm not going to compare directly the currents because in this case we have a VDS which is not negligibly small and in the previous case we had ID this dashed line for VDS which was negligibly small and of course if you apply a much Vds the current will be much larger so instead of comparing the currents what I'm going to compare our conductance of the channel because that's easier to compare right so instead of comparing the currents maybe you noticed already I did not plot here Id as a function of Vgs but I plotted Id divided by Vds which is the conductance of the channel So, when the VDS is negligibly small, conductance of the channel is given by the transfer curve I already showed you before, is this one here. What's going to happen now when the VDS is not negligibly small? What's going to be conductance of the channel in this case now, when we have this kind of charge distribution? What's going to be conductance of the channel? Is it going to be the same as before or larger or smaller? Well, before at this point charge distribution was just this, 6 holes. But now we have extra 2 holes because of this voltage on the drain. We have 8 holes, which means the channel is more conductive, we have more carriers inside. and that means that the conductance of the channel now is larger and that's why if this was the conductance when the VGS was zero and VDS was zero the conductance now is larger, is here. You see, this is not plotted in scale because the change in the carrier density is not that much. We have two extra holes so that means in theory that's two out of six more you have you initially we had six now we have eight so the current should be approximately larger by factor of eight divided by six which is one point something when we say it's not really plotted in scale but that's not important the current is larger it's here and now what happens as we increase vgs from zero to some positive value that is as we go from here to the right this doesn't change that's fixed by the drain source voltage which is fixed for a given transfer characteristic as I said this line just translates up and this line just translates down okay and the first interesting point which means as it goes down we are getting fewer and fewer holes in the channel and the current of course must go down because conductance of the channel goes down because we have fewer and fewer holes in the channel. The first interesting or characteristic point is going to happen when this line translates down so that at the left hand edge hits zero. So that is when the channel is depleted next to the gate. When does this happen? Whenever you see that the carrier density at certain point hits zero it means at that point band structure is such that the Dirac point hit Fermi level, right? Because that's the condition of carrier depletion which means at this point the Dirac point hit the Fermi level, which means what? At this point here the band structure was shifting down and at some point, at this point here, the Dirac point hit the Fermi level. What's the condition that Dirac point hits the Fermi level? The condition that Dirac point hits the Fermi level is that at that point the voltage at the capacitor is equal how much? Vth, the Dirac voltage, because when the voltage of the capacitor is equal to the Dirac voltage, then the band structure at that point shifted down that much that the Dirac point hit the Fermi level, which means the condition to obtain this point is very simple. Condition is, okay, we wrote it, it's this one here, the condition is that at that point voltage between the gate and the channel which is the voltage on the capacitor which is Vd channel at zero because this is x equals zero is equal to the Dirac voltage right but voltage between the gate and the channel at zero is equal to what it's always equal to Vgs because the potential of the channel next to the source is always equal to the source potential. So that means as we increase the gate source voltage, this line standing like this goes down, so the line goes down, the conductance goes down and when the Vgs hits the Dirac voltage, we have this situation here when the carriers are totally depleted next to the source and we have certain current. Notice that this current is above the current we had in the absence of Vds, that is the conductance is above that, why? Because when the Vds is zero, we had zero everywhere here if you remember, There was no voltage drop in the channel, Vds was zero and this line was actually flat line which coincided with the x-axis. We had a zero carrier distribution everywhere, but now the carrier distribution is not zero, you see. We have these two extra electrons which we got for instance from, because we have applied this Vds, you understand? So that means that the current actually conductance is above the conductance we previously had in the absence of VDS, when the VDS was negligibly small. But that also means the minimum is not here. To hit the minimum of the conductivity of the channel, you have to keep increasing VGS until this line goes down so much that it hits zero in the middle, because in this position you have the fewer carriers in the channel. So, is this true or no? Well, obviously yes, because I said it and plotted like this, but you should understand that in this case you have fewer carriers than here. Why? How can you actually calculate the amount of carriers here. How can you calculate the total amount of carriers in the channel? You can integrate the surface charge density, right? But the surface charge density when you integrate, because the width is constant, it goes down to integration with respect to x, you get integral sigma dx, right? Which basically means that the amount of carriers you have in the channel is proportional to this surface area here, right? And now look at this triangle, try to compare these two situations. Of course, the total carrier, the total charge in this channel is zero because you have the same amount of positive and negative charges, but in terms of conduction they do not cancel out, okay? You have some electrons, few of them just, you have some holes, just few of them and they contribute to the conduction. You can easily understand this if you plot this triangle like this. So this is the situation here. Situation there is we have one triangle going, we have triangles going like this. Parallel to this line, right? I know you can easily see that this surface area is larger than these two together. Okay? If you plot them together, you will easily understand this. Okay? So that means that here we have fewer carriers in the channel. That's the minimum of the carriers of the channel, which means when this line hits zero in the middle of the channel, we have actually minimum conductance. So the medium is at some voltage which is above the Dirac voltage. But actually how much is this voltage here? Well that's easy to calculate. Again you have depletion in the middle of the channel which means here in the middle of the channel voltage between the gate and the channel must be equal to the Dirac voltage. And how much is the voltage in the middle of the channel? What is Vg channel in the middle of the channel? I mean you can use the formulas but you can already understand like this. This is always true. How much is the channel potential in the middle of the channel? It's Vs plus in the middle of the channel if this is gradual is half of the Vds. That's it. Vg minus Vs is Vgs minus Vds half. That's, at that point this voltage must be equal to Dirac voltage to be, to have at that point depleted channel, okay. So when you solve this by Vgs you get that the Vgs is Vth plus half of the Vds, which means that this minimum here is shifted from the original Dirac voltage by half of the drain source voltage to the right. Also notice that the current on this minimum is actually above this minimum here, actually conductance. Why? Because originally on the Dirac voltage this curve was actually flat line like this, horizontal line, there are no carriers. Here, although this is medium, we still have some carriers, which means that the carrier density here, which means that the conductivity here is slightly larger than here, which means that the conductance here is above conductance here, which means that the conductance at point 3, which corresponds to this situation, is slightly about this one here, which we originally had in the absence of finite Vds. Okay and now you understand why is this minimum, because now if you keep increasing Vgs further, this line keeps going down and now we are just inducing more and more electrons. So So the conductivity of the channel now starts increasing again. So for instance, for the gate source voltage, which is here, which is shifted to the right by the same amount that this minimum here is shifted to the left, we will have this situation, we will have a symmetric situation, and we will have this current here. This symmetric situation happens, so this situation at point 4 is identical to point 2, it happens when now this line goes down so much that the channel gets depleted next to the drain, okay, and when the channel gets depleted next to the drain that means next to the drain how much is the voltage on capacitor. Next to the drain voltage on the capacitor is Vgd right. This is always Vgs plus Vsd that is Vgs minus Vds and the carriers are depleted next to the drain when this voltage is equal to the Dirac voltage. So you get next this happens depletion next to the drain, where Vgs is Vth plus Vds, which is written here and that's exactly distance between these two points, is exactly distance between these two points, so this picture is totally symmetric to this one and you should have the same current at 0.2 and 0.4 and if you keep further, if you keep further increasing Vgs the line keeps going more down and at some voltage here which is symmetrical to 0.1 with respect to the minimum you will get this situation which is symmetrical to 0.1 and the current should be equal to current at 0.1 because we have the same carrier distribution is just reverted, inverted sorry. So now you see that's the transfer characteristic of a GFET when the VDS is finite so that's how you get it when the VDS is finite. So what can you understand from here when the VDS is finite the only difference is that the transfer curve moves to the right by half of the VDS and the currents at the minimum is slightly up. So basically you take the original transfer curve for VDS zero, you shift to the right by VDS half and then push up a little bit, that's it. That's how you get the transfer curve at finite VDS. Okay, is this clear? That's it. So now we know the transfer curve at finite VDS. Similarly to what we had before, although at point four we have symmetry, so although point four and two are symmetric with respect to the minimum and also point five and one, as I already told you current typically at point four is going to be slightly smaller than at point two due to small electron carrier mobility because of the graphene wave function. Okay, let's do one exercise. So, let's now exercise this. So, imagine at the exam you get this problem. You get set of transfer characteristics on a GFET at different drain source voltages. In contrast to the previous plot where conductance was plotted, here the current was plotted, so it's not ID divided by VDS but just ID. And you can already understand that even though not all drain source voltages are given, you can understand that Vds2 is larger than Vds1 because the current for Vds2 is larger than current for Vds1 and so on. So that means Vds 5 is larger than Vds 4, this is larger than Vds 3, larger than Vds 2 and finally this is larger than Vds 1 which is given to be 20 millivolts. Okay when you change Vds the current, when you increase Vds current increases and as you're going to see in this problem because of the, well you can actually see from the measurement due to the very large difference in current values. So, for instance, here the current is how much? Less than 0.1 milliamp, maybe 0. So, this is 10 micro, 20, 30, 40. So, this is about 50 microamps and this is about 1, 2, 3, 4, like 5 milliamp. There is a huge difference in current and for that reason you see logarithmic scale as u, not linear but logarithmic so that you can see the plots. And now this is typically how the transfer characteristics of a GFAT look like. It's a set of transfer curves, each measured for a fixed VDS. So when you see something like this, that VDS is written next to the transfer curve, it simply means that this particular transfer curve was measured when the VDS was fixed to some value Vds2 which is not known at the moment and this one here is measured at the fixed Vds1 which is 20 millivolts and so on. Okay, so each of these transfer curves was measured for one fixed Vds which is written here on the right and now the question here in this problem is to find all those drain source voltages for which currents were measured. So how are we going to do this? Well first of all what you can say is that we can find out the position of minima at each of the curves because that's given so you simply say for instance and that means that the exam it's very important you bring the ruler at the exam don't laugh because I'm going to give you no I'm joking it's okay I'm going to give you you see he's already already, can I give you already something? So basically you are going to get transfer curves plotted and you have to calculate something from them and for instance in this problem we have to calculate at which VGS we have this minimum here, okay. So you simply take the ruler, draw the line down, you will get much finer division on the axis and then you draw and say okay so this minimum is at 0.12 volts and then you draw a line here this one is at 0.18 you draw a line down this one is at 0.42 this is 0.6 this is 0.9 and so on okay and now if you have minima for each curve then the rest of the problem is easy why because we know that the minimum of the transfer curve is at the Dirac voltage plus half of the applied VDS. So you can write down that minimum of the transfer curve is at voltage which I denoted by the Dirac voltage of applied VDS because the minimum depends on the applied VDS which is the original Dirac voltage for equilibrium when the VDS is zero plus half of the applied VDS. From this we can calculate the Dirac voltage y because if you look at the first curve, the one at the bottom, we have everything. We know how much is the Vth of Vds, so this is 0.12 and we know how much is the Vds, which is 20 millivolts. So, let's calculate it. You say 0.12 volts is, this is the unknown Dirac voltage plus half of the Vds, which is 10 millivolts. So, you get that the Dirac voltage of the unbiased transistor is 120 millivolts minus 10 millivolts which is 110 millivolts that's 0.11 volts that's what's written here and now we have the Dirac voltage of unbiased transistor we know the Dirac voltages of bias in these biased cases here for the other curves so we can easily calculate the rest of the VDS is how using the same formula because from the same formula you can write down that Vds is what? is the minimum minus the Dirac voltage of the unbiased transistor multiplied by 2 which is written here which is written here okay and now just calculate for instance for this curve here Vds2 is 2 times the minimum which is 0.18 minus Vth which is 0.11. So 0.18 minus 0.11 is 0.07 times 2.014 that's it. That's Vds2 and then please repeat for the other curves and you will get the other values of the drain source voltage. And now on the right I put the actual values which were used for these measurements and you can see that we are close but not exactly. For instance this one was actually 0.1, this one 0.5, this one was 1 which is quite close and this one was 158 and that's what I already told you. This simple theory comes from the model which is qualitatively right but quantitatively we are going to miss it a bit and now you can see it from here. And because we know now the, because out of this calculation we got at the beginning the direct voltage of the unbiased transistor then we can use this value to find out the density of holes due to the impurities and I just calculated here using the simple formula which does not take into account the quantum capacitance so this is something we've done in the previous slide so you can simply calculate and get the value so for instance that would be one of the problems of the exam, you can get something like this. Finally, I just would like to note that one of the problems we solved previously should be now corrected, because if you go back to slide 75, there's the first slide when we calculated the hole density which comes from the impurities, if you remember we used, we had like three transistors, all of them with the direct voltage half a volt and it was those three curves were measured at the drain source voltage 0.1 volt. I said it's very small, yeah, but in reality if you like to be more precise you should then use this formula and say that half a volt we got at the minimum was the direct voltage plus half of the applied VDS and because VDS was not really zero, it was 100 millivolts, you should say okay this is then 50 millivolts so the actual direct voltage was half a volt minus 50 millivolts which was 450 millivolts okay. So that would be the correct solution in this problem and then that would be the correct carrier density but anyway this is just a small note for that problem. And now finally so far we discussed the transfer characteristics of GFET now we know how to draw them right it looks like this for the unbiased transistor if you have VDS just moves by half of the VDS to the right and slightly up and now it's time to plot the output characteristics because that's what we haven't discussed so far and the reason why I haven't discussed so far output characteristics was simply because for output characteristics is the other way around you have to plot the drain current as a function of the drain source voltage when the gate source voltage is fixed so basically it requires to change the drain source voltage from zero to some value and that's why that requires to understand the channel distribution potential distribution when the drain source voltage is not negligibly small so now because we know what happens when we have a finite VDS applied to the transistor now we can finally figure out how the output characteristics look like. So what I'm going to discuss first before I plot those characteristics, what happens with the charge distribution in the system, in the transistor, if the situation is the other way around. We fixed VGS and changed VDS, because that's the condition for plotting the output curves. you fix VGS, so each output curve is plotted for a fixed VGS, but you change VDS. Okay, so let's try to understand this. So the first point, when you plot output curve, you have to fix VGS. Basically, we have to pick one value of VGS. So which value? I am going to pick this value here. so what I'm going to do now I'm going to discuss what happens with the charge distribution in the transistor when the VGS voltage between the gate and source is fixed to this value VGS3 this value here as you can see this value corresponds to the state of the transistor deep into the conduction when the Fermi level is deep into the conduction band which is this case here, right? So now I'm going to fix VGS to that value and see what happens when I change VDS. So let's consider this. Because we have to change VDS, let's start first from VDS equals 0. Let's start from one biased case to understand what happens to this transistor when the VGS is fixed to this value VGS3 and the VDS is 0. zero. So, if the Vds is zero then we have the situation we had at the beginning right when the charge density is defined only by the gate source voltage and because here we are deep into the because the Fermi level is deep into the conduction band let's assume that for this value of Vgs3 we have 12 electrons induced in the channel because you remember as we increase Vgs to the right, we first if you remember this point here we had the six holes in the channel then we increase Vgs the number of holes decreases because you're adding more and more electrons so let's assume at this point here we added by Vgs applied 12 electrons in the channel, which means we have 12 positive charges on the gate, but those positive charges on the gate are not important right now, we are looking just what happens in the channel. So, what happens is, if you have 12 electrons induced by the gate and you originally had 6 holes in the channel due to impurities, 6 electrons will cancel out six holes and we end up with the total inverted channel with six electrons. So instead of having six holes we have six electrons because we induced twelve electrons. That's why I took this symmetric situation, right? That is if you look at this expression what I showed you before, the total charge in the channel is an impurity charge, so which is six holes at the beginning, minus QG which is this 12 electrons so we end up with only six electrons we have with the transistor which has now n-type channel. So now if Vgs is fixed to this value Vgs3 this is now what we have in the channel in the absence of Vds. We have those six electrons now. how can we calculate this using this formula, right? this is the charge in the channel impurity charge is always Cg times Dirac voltage charge induced by the gate neglecting the quantum capacitance is simply CgVgs So that means that the charge in the channel is CG times Vth minus Vgs. When you divide by the surface area A, you get surface charge density, which is CG over A, which is Cox times Vth minus Vgs. That's it. Because Vgs is Vgs3, which is larger than Vth, this difference is negative and that's this negative charge density here, which corresponds to 6 electrons. We have this negative charge density here. Okay, so that's now the starting point of the channel at that VGS equal VGS3. Now let's see what happens when we apply the drain source voltage. So again, we have here the channel potential. On the left, as always, is the source potential because of the source contact. On the right is always the drain potential. and when we apply some positive voltage between drained and source the voltage difference between the drain potential and the source potential is Vds we are going to assume again the gradual approximation so we have a linear distribution so this is exactly the same as before and then what do we have then if this is then the, this is partially repetition what we've done before, if this is the potential in the channel then what we really need is the voltage on the gate capacitor which is at any point which is the voltage between the gate and the channel, voltage between the gate and the channel is the gate potential which is fixed minus the channel potential which increases to the right like this. for a given Vgs and Vds equal Vs, so when there is no drain source voltage, this is just Vs everywhere and we get the voltage between the gate and the channel is simply Vg minus Vs, we just get Vgs everywhere. But as we discussed previously, when we apply a positive Vds, the potential on the bottom plate of the capacitor goes up and the voltage on the capacitor, which is the constant voltage minus this potential goes down. If this linearly goes up, this linearly goes down and this is the expression we derived previously, right? So, this is all the same, this is all the same but what is now going to happen? What is the difference now? The difference now is that now we keep Vgs fixed but we change Vds. So, what that means is the following, If we keep fixed VGS, for instance VGS3, it means that this point here always stays here. It's always fixed. So the point next to the source is always at the gate source voltage and this never changes because we fixed VGS. What changes is VDS. It starts from zero and it goes up, which means that the potential distribution in the channel starts from the horizontal one and because this potential goes up this just goes up like this and that means that the voltage on the capacitor starts from this horizontal line and then just goes down because this point is fixed so now if you look at the voltage on the capacitor this is fixed to Vgs and this here just goes down. Why? Because this value here is Vgd, Vgd is Vgs which is constant minus Vds, Vds goes up Vgs minus Vds goes down. If this is linear this is linear and this is the equation right. So now the difference is instead of having slanted curve which goes down like this, we have a curve which is fixed here, start from the horizontal and then just keep going down. What that means for our charge carriers? So, when the Vgs is equal to Vgs3, which gives us this charge distribution, we have six electrons in the channel, right? But now look what happens to the voltage between the gate and the channel. Here it goes down, means it's getting less and less positive, because it's reducing on this side, okay? So if you have a capacitor with a voltage which on one side is getting less and less positive, it means on the top plate you have fewer and fewer positive charges but on the bottom plate you have fewer and fewer negative charges and that's why starting from this current density here with six electrons the density here is reducing because the voltage drop on the capacitor on this side is reducing right and similarly if this is linear function then this is a linear function and if this function starts like this from horizontal and it goes down, this one starts from horizontal and then on this side, so this is zero, this side goes like this. During all this time this point here never changes, it always stays here because this voltage on the capacitor never changes it always next to the source stays at VGS because VGS is constant okay. Now I have to tell you that in reality you know it's maybe time to discuss this just like a side note in reality this potential distribution does not look like this really more realistically looks like this and that's case for all potential distributions with VDS which changes across the channel. This is now the first time I'm commenting it because now we understand how it looks like so I can maybe add this comment that in reality looks like this. Why? Because you see when you go from the source to the drain carrier density goes down. If the carrier density goes down it means we have fewer electrons which means that conductivity goes down, which means that that part resistivity goes up or resistance goes up. And I mentioned voltage divider, if you have a voltage divider with resistances, where is the largest voltage drop? On the largest resistor, which means as the resistance on the right hand side goes up, you have a larger voltage drop on the right hand side and on the left hand side and that's why the voltage drop is not really linear but it more realistically looks something like this, okay, because you see here we have a smaller voltage drop than here, here we have a smaller potential change than here, that's the reason but as I said to really calculate that would be extremely complicated so we are not going to do it. so come back to what I just explained so let's discuss now what happens when we change Vds so let's start from Vds0 if you start from Vds0 we start from six electrons that situation we have in the in the channel okay and then to understand what's happening here well we can always plot this line to go up like this or as I already told you because we always assume it's a straight line is just enough to understand what's happening next to the drain and then just connect the points next to the source and next to the drain with a straight line. So the situation next, so the state of the channel next to the drain is defined by the gate drain voltage right because the voltage between the gate and the channel next to the drain is the voltage between the gate and drain right that's what we already seen and the voltage between gate and drain is Vgs minus Vds I already told you this which then allows us to understand the state next to the drain directly on this plot too if we also plot Vgd together with Vgs because Vgs is voltage on the gate capacitor next to the source and the voltage on the gate capacitor next to the drain is VGD because this voltage VGD is VGS minus VDS it's very easy to represent on the VGD axis plotted parallel to VGS how because if we start from VDS equals zero if this is our VGS then the VGD is also equal to this VGS why because VGD is VGS minus VDS when the VDS is zero Vgd is just Vgs, okay, and then as you increase Vds, we are going to increase Vds, as Vds is increased, Vgd, because it's fixed Vgs minus Vds, Vgd decreases. So, for instance if this is the value of Vds, how much is Vgd? Well, just this fixed Vgs minus Vds. Okay, so if you just plot here to the left Vds, you will get Vgd. Why is this useful? Because that shows you the state of the channel next to the drain. You see, for instance if this Vds is this Vds we applied here, that means that the next to the drain you just put Vds we have fewer electrons which is exactly what we get here, we have fewer electrons. Okay so let's plot it, so now you can understand this plot very easily, but as I said you don't need this for Vgd you can just look this line and just push it like this up. So let's consider what happens, so when the Vds is zero we have six electrons fine, this is this situation here. When we increase Vds, Vgd goes down, this charge goes up, we have fewer electrons and we end up with this situation here, which is plotted here. Basically, all we have to do is to understand that next to the source nothing changes because the voltage on the gate capacitor next to the source is Vgs which is fixed and if you look at the VGD, as you increase VDS, you see the carrier density next to the drain goes down, goes down, goes down, you see. So, for instance, for some VDS like this one here, we have fewer electrons next to the drain, so this is this situation here, and then if you take this point, which is the same point as here, and draw the straight line up to here, this will be the carrier density for some positive VDS. now if you further increase VDS so that VDS is exactly this difference between VGS and VTH which is written here VDS is equal VGS minus VTH then VGD is going to be exactly VTH which means that the voltage on the gate capacitor next to the drain is exactly equal to the Dirac voltage which means that next to the drain carriers are completely depleted because the drain is at this point here and I denoted point of depletion with T you can also understand this from this plot if you take this line if you take this line and push it up so this point is fixed and this goes up at some point this point will hit zero at that point next to the drain we have no carriers which means at that point the Fermi level hit the Dirac point next to the drain which means that next to the drain we have this situation here. When does this happen? It happens when the VDS is equal to this difference VGS minus VTH then we have depletion next to the drain remember you have the same condition in MOSFET when VDS hits VGS minus VTH carriers are depleted next to the drain in MOSFET there is no difference, it's the same. But in contrast to MOSFET, and I will discuss this later when I come to MOSFET, if you keep further increasing VDS, you push channel next to the drain into the valence band. Basically this line, which hits zero here, if you go with a larger VDS, you just keep going up. and basically you end up with a situation like this. That is for Vds for instance equal this value here So between this Vgs and this value here, which is larger than Vgs minus Vth State of the channel next to the drain will be this The Fermi level is now inside the valence band and you now have holes in the channel next to the drain and and if you keep further increasing Vds you keep pushing channel next to the drain deeper and deeper into the valence band you have more and more holes basically this line as we discussed goes up hit zero that's at Vgs minus Vth if you keep increasing Vds above this just keeps going up and up and up and up and you get more and more holes next to the channel next to the drain in the channel so now if you understand this it's very easy to plot the output curves of GFET but before I do it let me just comment on one point that I put here which is important to understand well which is important particularly to understand MOSFET so as this line goes up as this line goes up notice that the depletion goes deeper and deeper into the channel do you see it? so if you take this line and it goes up hits zero next to the drain and if you keep increasing it further the intersection between this line and zero level which is point T keeps moving to the left keeps coming closer and closer to the source. At that point we have depletion in the channel so wherever that point is you can write down that at that point voltage on the gate capacitor, voltage between the gate and the channel is equal to Vth, right? You can say that at T point you always have this. Voltage on the gate capacitor is equal to the Dirac voltage. And again this is Vgs minus V channel source equal Vth, right? because VG channel is VGS plus VS channel or VGS minus V channel S, that's voltage kickoff slow, right? You get this, which means if you solve by V channel S, you get that at point T, voltage drop between the channel and the source is always VGS minus VTH which is constant because we started with the assumption that we don't change VGS so that means as this point moves to the left that means that the voltage drop between that point and the source is always VGS minus VTH ok in other words you can maybe understand better write it like this here is zero here is source here is drain okay this is L here is drain and this is the point T at which we have the depletion so the voltage drop between the channel and the source is always Vgs minus Vth at the point T where we have depletion. So we have depletion here. That means that the remaining part of the applied Vds drop between that point and the drain. Which means that this voltage drop here is how much? is Vds minus this which means when the Vds when you apply Vds which is equal Vgs minus Vth the point is here when you apply a larger voltage depletion moves to the left between source and the depletion point you always have the same potential drop Vgs minus Vth and the remaining applied Vds drops here okay that will be important especially for MOSFET from the stand okay so this is clear I can finally draw the output curve of GFET so what you see here is the output curve of a GFET for VGS fixed and equal VGS3 which is exactly what I've done. How can we understand this output curve? Let's start from the beginning. Let's start from zero. If we start from zero that is from the situation number one, we start from discharge distribution. What do we have here. Here we have a piece of a conductor with six electrons, right? You apply drain source voltage which increases from zero and well this is just a resistor. You get a linear IV curve. You get a linear IV curve. You keep increasing Vds, you reach point to where you have approximately the same amount of carriers like before, which means you still have pretty much the same resistor and this keeps going up linearly up and this is so called ohmic regime. For small VDS there is not much disturbance in the original equilibrium distribution that defined with the fixed VGS. You have basically a resistor when you apply drain source voltage the current simply linearly increases with this VDS. However, as you keep increasing VDS you see what's happening. As you keep increasing VDS the carriers get depleted more and more next to the drain. The consequence is that as you increase VDS you are depleting channel from carriers it means the carrier density in the channel especially next to the drain drops down so you have a resistor whose resistance increases this thing is becoming more resistant because you have fewer carriers and that means that you have a resistor but this resistance of this resistor actually keeps now increasing which means that the current although it's increasing because you increase Vds, it's getting increasing slower and slower because resistance is becoming larger and larger. So, the current keeps increasing but slower and slower. So, that's why originally starts like a straight line, ohmic, but then as you keep decreasing the amount of carriers in the channel, it starts to slow down. It keeps slowing down and you get something like this. Typically this kink of the curve is assumed to be when you have totally depleted carriers next to the drain and that's at Vds equal to as written here Vgs minus Vth that is in our case because Vgs is fixed to Vgs3 this is Vgs3 minus Vth that's 0.3 Now between point 3 and 4 you keep increasing BDS as this curve goes up we keep here depleting electrons but we compensate that by adding some holes on the opposite side which means that the channel pretty much keeps the same resistance let's say which means that this slope here stays pretty much the same. The current does not change significantly just keeps following original trend that we had at point 2. But then the problem is that after point 4 yes we keep further depleting electrons but because this point is fixed you cannot totally deplete electrons next to the source, that's impossible, but by pushing line up you're actually heavily adding holes on this side. So now the conductivity of the channel starts increasing again because we're having now significantly more holes on this side and the current now starts speeding up again. And the larger the drain source voltage the more holes we have the curve is getting with the higher and higher slope because the system is becoming less and less resistive you're having more and more carriers. Do you understand this? That's the output curve of a GFET for a fixed VGS. This regime here after ohmic is called quasi saturation because why quasi? because in MOSFET you get saturation in a long channel MOSFET you get saturation which provides constant current but in case of a GFET the current is not constant it's actually with a slope it's increasing and for that reason this is called quasi-saturation because in order to avoid this increase what you need is not to have holes on this side You need to have channel totally depleted of carriers on the drain side. And that's not possible to do with the GFET, because with the GFET, once you deplete the electrons next to the drain, you start pumping in holes. Well, in MOSFET, as you remember, I'm going to discuss very soon, when you deplete carriers here next to the drain, there is nothing to add, because the Fermi level gets into the band gap. and there is no way to add carriers and that's why in a MOSFET the current will stay constant, I will explain this later here because you're pumping more carriers current keeps going up so that's why this is not a real saturation it's quasi-saturation and this third regime after 0.5 how it's called well that's some sort of ohmic regime again let's call it superohmic that doesn't have specific name we can call it superohmic regime Okay, so that's the output curve of a GFET, but what happens if we plot another output curve for another VGS? Because output curves are family of curves where each curve is plotted for a different fixed VGS, similar to transfer curves or characteristics which are family of curves, sorry, which are plotted each of them for a different fixed VGS. So what's going to happen if I change Vgs? What if I now fix Vgs to be not equal to Vgs3 but Vgs2, you see this green value here, value which is smaller than Vgs3. So I have here now the new situation plot output curve for Vgs equal Vgs2. So I plotted it here, it's the green curve below the black one, how can we understand it? Well, first you should understand that qualitatively speaking nothing is going to change because this Vgs2 is also right from the, on the right hand side of the Dirac voltage which means if we now fix Vgs to Vgs2, we are still going to start with the channel which is n-type, So we have electrons again, but because it's closer to the Dirac voltage, we don't have, let's say, 6 electrons, we have maybe 4 electrons. Why? Because with this voltage, we did not induce 12 electrons, which cancelled out 6 holes, we got 6 electrons. But we induced maybe 10 electrons, and they cancelled out 6 holes, we'd end up with 4 electrons, not 6. So basically it's the same situation as before, just with fewer electrons. Which means what? First difference is now that if you increase VDS, again you have resistor, but now which is more resistive. Because it has fewer carriers. And because it has fewer carriers, resistance is larger, which means when you increase VDS, the current is smaller. The channel is less conductive. So that means we have again ohmic regime like this. We start linear because we have a resistor, just the current is smaller because we have fewer carriers. That's the first difference. And the second difference, because this value is closer to the threshold voltage, it means everything will happen sooner. Because if Vgs is fixed here, you need this much to hit the Dirac point next to the drain. but now if the VGS is here you need only this much to hit direct point next to the drain which is written here because now corresponding VGS is smaller so required VDS to deplete next to the drain carriers next to the drain is smaller which means points two three four five they will all exist in this plot they will just move to the left because everything happens sooner you understand so that means point two is maybe here left to the original point two point three is here why because now the voltage at which we have depletion next to the drain is not Vgs3 minus Vth but it's Vgs2 minus Vth and Vgs2 is smaller so this point three is left from original point three and the same for point four and five you understand so basically the entire curve goes down because the current is smaller we start with a smaller conductivity state and all points are shifted to the left because everything happens sooner okay so the green curve that's the output curve for Vgs equal Vgs2 fine let's keep drawing what if I take Vgs equal Vgs1 which is exactly the Dirac voltage Well, first of all, that means for Vds0 I already start from depleted channel, which means what? It means that in this case I induced only six electrons in the channel, they cancel out six calls that we originally had from impurities and we end up with empty channel. okay which means we have a channel with the smallest possible conductivity and secondly because Vgs is exactly Vth it means already at Vds equals 0 we are at point 3 so there is no point 1 and point 2 this doesn't exist we are already here why because when the Vgs is equal Vth we get the depletion next to the drain already at Vds equals zero so as we increase Vds we just go here we just go deeper and deeper into the valence band basically this curve starts from zero okay and you keep pushing it up so you just induce holes next to the drain so this is the state of the smallest conductivity that's why when you increase Vds first current increases very slowly because this is the state of the smallest conductivity we have the smallest current but then as Vds increases so Vgs minus Vth is here as Vds increases from zero we just keep pushing drain deeper and deeper into the valence band and the current increases and we get this orange curve okay and now finally let's give for another let's give it a shot for another VGS let's for instance consider VGS 0 VGS 0 fixed is this value here if you look at my plot if you look at my plot this is the state symmetric to the one we had at the beginning. Because that means, because you remember VGS is zero, there are no carriers induced by the gate and the only carriers we have are six calls from the beginning. So here we have a six holes, Fermi level into the valence band, totally opposite from this one where we had six electrons, right? But because we have now six holes rather than six electrons, the channel has the same conductivity. If we neglect the difference in mobility, the channel has the same conductivity because we have the same amount of carriers, just of the opposite sign. But that means that initially we start from the resistor where we have not 6 electrons but 6 holes. It has the same resistance assuming same mobility which means when you start now from the Vgs0 curve must go must coincide with the black one must have the same IV curve of the black one because we have the same resistance. But what's the difference now? The difference now is that if you keep increasing now VDS above zero, if you keep increasing VDS above zero, what happens is that originally we had the six holes, so this was the charge distribution, so we had six holes you remember and now this curve goes up right we just pushing it up so that means we are getting more and more holes next to the drain basically conductivity of the channel just keeps increasing as we increase Vds which means the current starts speeding up so it goes now above this linear of this resistor just keeps speeding up and goes above and this is now what will be the output curve for VGS equals zero. In other words if you would like to get some sort of saturation which is important for transistor operation, you have to how bias this transistor. You must have VGS above the Dirac voltage. You must have VGS above the Dirac voltage because if it's below then you get this. You get something which is just is becoming more and more conductive, that's not really good. And you may ask me now, but does it mean we have advantage with the MOSFET? Because this doesn't happen with the MOSFET. Well, what's going to happen with the MOSFET below the threshold voltage? It's going to be in the off state, so you can't get this at all. So it's a totally different situation because of the band gap. and what you will notice now is that something that I mentioned before you can't turn off graphene transistor if you look at the output curves what do you see? you see that you never can get output curve which coincides with the VDS axis that's impossible because the smallest conductivity state is actually this one here and you can get some small current only here but further away you go with VDS the current just goes up you can't turn it off it's impossible to turn it off regardless of the VDS and you can understand this also from the transfer curves because if you plot a transfer curve you get the minimum at the Dirac point but it's not zero that's at VDS 0 if you apply positive VDS what's going to happen to this transfer curve if you look at the transfer curves you get, ok, it's there that's for VDS equals 0 and what happens when you increase VDS this moves to the right and it goes up remember? it's going to look like this so this state here is the state of the minimum conductivity here, that's the off state you can't go below this, you apply voltage this just goes up that's the state of the minimum, so there is no real off state in GFETS and now finally, ok we don't have much time but let me just start so we will finish tomorrow with this slide let's now compare with the MOSFET so let's give comparison with the semiconductor fat of course when I say MOSFET that does not necessarily mean silicon MOSFET it could be also molybdenum disulfide MOSFET because molybdenum disulfide is N-type material so what I'm going to show you now here is valid for any MOS2 MOSFET okay it doesn't have to be silicon fat could be molybdenum disulfide and to understand what's going on with the MOSFET you should make the same plot with the band structure including VGS and VDS just adapt it to the MOSFET so that's what I've done so first here you plot the transfer curve of the MOSFET and you remember the transfer curve of the MOSFET looks like this for the n-type, it's zero up to Vth and then it goes up. The band structure looks like this for each point. Here, you remember when I explained you, when you start with a small gate source voltage, the Fermi level is somewhere inside the band gap and so on. Okay, we will We continue tomorrow, guys.